 A.S.Pushkin. Eugene Onegin (tr.Ch.Johnston)

 Пушкин. Евгений Онегин (пер. на англ. Ч. Джонстона) * 


 Translator's note

 Chapter Three
 Chapter One
 Chapter Five
 Chapter Seven
 Chapter Four

 Chapter Two
 Contents

 Chapter Eight
 x x x
 x x x

 Chapter Six
 O Russia!

 thou, my Svetlana!
 Remember the retort satiric!
 but Olga would have never read!

 the impatient conqueror was humbled!
 and saved from being charmed or fooled!
 The jealous poet's gloom is lightened!
 would have been all that we required!

 reader, or where you've shone and glittered!
 whom thirty centuries have adored!
 So there she stood, forlorn, deserted!

 the silence when our talk had ceased!
 of swaddling clothes - already blighted!
 and been as happy... as I could!
 have reunited friend to friend!
 the poet struck down by his friend!

 your advent swamps me in its flood!
 your night of fretting's left no trace!

 Farewell the games of golden childhood!
 your presence aches, and in my blood!

 and pale, and fade without a word!
 gay nature and its sparkling distance!

 in rural calm's most secret place!
 he'd pop the poison in his chalice!
 Farewell to you, my free existence!
 all in a blaze, I said: it's he!

 that your proud glance is sure to take!

 breakneck by moonlight at my side!
 how well she'd studied her new role!
 Let others learn from his example!
 misunderstanding, noise, and blame!

 the strain of Tasso's octave-rhyme!

 Vladimir Lensky. Quick, let's dine!
 for unmeant kindness - how he shone!
 the country's pretty stupid here!
 is all those stubborn lips desire!
 of Olga: love's that kind of bore!
 your feet, to pale and waste... what rapture!
 impart such lessons as you please!
 come to the fields, my friends! To horse!
 but madrigals I've got to write!
 already high in treason's league!
 What ails him? he's in some strange daze!
 of solitude, and peace abiding!
 She dropped... ``It's he! Eugene arriving!
 so much, I'm left no time to speak!
 blest is the advent of the dark!
 of husband's friendship - worst of all!
 the fear and rage with which I foam!
 so, if we want to change, we can!
 harboured by maidens of thirteen!
 In Tanya, what a transformation!

 my declaration may give rise!
 the toll of those borne off by fate!

 A sorry state of things, it's true!

 what wings our first successes gave!
 bestirred himself, was devilish active!
 ``I can't sleep, nyanya: it's so stifling!
 how sensuously her eyes are dreaming!
 his news has set the party humming!
 I love my Tatyana too much!
 of perfect bliss in you. Enough!
 in triumph you'll see winter through!
 God grant them years and years of health!
 take leave of my lightheaded youth!
 Muse of the epic, bless my work!
 you made me drunk as one could ask!
 who else? - the hero of our novel!
 the Lord have mercy on us all!
 sits there beside the window-sill!

 ever so roughly rocked my soul!

 or seminarist in yellow shawl!
 a Lancer - how she deified him!
 On this we'll part; goodbye again!
 he loves you... like your kith and kin!
 her secret work of magic suasion!
 she wrote in French... what a confession!
 of his Och&aacute;kov7 decoration!
 What folly! and what retribution!
 ``What, Grandison? oh, Grandison!
 the laurel in the old man's crown!
 ``Get up, my child, it's time, get up!
 with sheer enchantment fills her cup!
 my last poor lepton for a sup!
 how brilliant with its instant tear!

 sacred to children of Apollo!

 and human words, and horse's stamp!
 your loved one, honourable reader!
 Enough. The load is off my shoulder!
 ``You pile one eclogue on another!
 Drive on, Andryushka! quicker, quicker!
 he fled from their resounding chatter!
 Moscow's the place, the marriage-fair!
 exists for me one special pair!
 one customary grief each hour!
 on this unstable life, my friends!
 her out-of-fashion clothes!... oh, mercies!
 you object of my guileless ditties!
 its views, its passions, or its cares!
 to lie down at her feet like slaves!
 stripping my soul before your eyes!

 stuff of the poet's hallowed dreams!

 for jokes, and rows, and merry dreams!
 and says: ``Farewell, you vales and fountains!
 farewell you too, familiar mountains!
 Christmas came on. What joy, what gladness!
 Alas, it's not so hard to guess!
 in that one sound, for Russian hearts!
 what store of riches it imparts!
 but from our friends, good Lord protect us!
 the indifferent, or the deadly serious!
 O rus!
 as the perfection of our days!
 of absence on my wandering ways!
 in which, dear friends, we're all afloat!
 and then concludes: she loves him yet!

 last many a day, and many a night!

 I ask you, each and every poet!
 you gave me such a shocking fright!
 or else... or else, may God forfend it!
 with censure - I've done all to earn it!
 no spark of fun in all its rot!
 and self-oblivion was his art!
 wound that had seared my Tanya's heart!
 in all the world could take my heart!
 the heart of the professional flirt!
 A ball: the joy of every guest!
 you'll read: here's Pradt,7 here's Walter Scott!
 You husbands, deeply I respect you!
 long life to our dear friend, Bordeaux!
 jointly would tread life's humble way!
 I've wasted too much life away!

 Only the ode, that solemn story!

 and never stir a foot away!
 Why, pretty one, you're up already!
 have your fill of revelry!
 But onward, onward with my story!
 He rings at once, and what a scurry!
 Capricious belles of grand Society!
 Take Olga's shoulders now - the beauty!
 ``Princess, mon ange!'' ``Pachette!'' ``Alina!''
 ``How long can you... ?'' ``Dearest kuzina!''
 ``How slow you are at guessing, nyanya!''
 down in our damp earth-mother's womb!''
 he hears a voice; ``well, what? he's killed!''
 ``All right, I'll come then...'' ``What a friend!''
 beloved friend, thou art my bride!''

 ``The house, the park... I'll go and see!''

 ``Who would have thought it?'' ``What an age!''
 come in and warm yourself a minute!''
 and whisper ``Dunya, pay attention!''
 ``The Lord God be with you, my daughter!''
 ``To...?'' ``Larina.'' ``Tatyana? never!''
 Let's go, our friendship's worth the labour!''
 Onegin too. ``Good Lord, at last!''
 sing about something else at last!''
 young poet, be for ever blest!''
 ``You're off? why, there's a poet for you!''
 ``My goodness, how the years do fly!''
 "When will the devil come for you?"''
 ``Tanya's no child - it's past a joke,''
 ``Today he promised he'd be here,''
 I'm near to sobbing, near to weeping!...''

 kept asking: "shall I live to see"...''

 She faced him, questioning: ``But you?...''
 give me the homely hearth, and lend...''
 with every different kind of rabble...''
 and not a mention of my name...''
 but, nurse, you see... Oh, don't refuse...''
 ``Oh nurse, a favour, a petition...''
 times were, when master's least suggestion...''
 The olden days, I want to hear...''
 from deepest backwood, furthest under...''
 Tatyana's here, you know I've brought her...''
 but whispers, the guffaw of fools...''
 while odes have high and noble aims...''
 you age, and life's just grief and sadness...''
 too long he's hoaxed us high and low...''

 the poet's only theme is ``I.''

 15 A mocking reference to Mikhail Muraviev's poem ``To the Goddess of the Neva.''
 but you're not paying any heed.''
 ``Well, what?'' the neighbour says, ``he's killed.''
 don't let me stray in paths unplanned.''
 ``Boredom, that's what so bad, my friend.''
 Onegin's waiting on the ground.''
 and trails alone around the wood.''
 to rains, and flax, and the stockyard.''
 fresh as a poppy-flower, your face.''
 he's moved... you see him from the side.''
 yourself too long from social life.''
 and I'll be true to him, for life.''
 ``But tell me who she is.'' ``My wife.''
 ``r&eacute;veillez-vous, belle endormie.''
 him prove it, writing after me.''

 won't benefit these guts of mine.''

 to bellow out: ``she's mine, she's mine.''
 ``I am in love; leave me alone.''
 There's vacancies in plenty there.''
 Since when is this?'' ``Two years or more.''
 ``Command me, darling, as you choose.''
 far from it! just one more collapse.''
 and I surrender to my fate.''
 had chased me to the world above.''
 you're all in fever... heavens above.''
 ``Nurse, I'm not ill; I... I'm in love.''
 that inexperience leads to grief.''
 now even Didelot's tedious stuff.''
 still hardly opened up, from fading.''
 ``the mail explains the time he's taking.''

 ``My dearest heart, you're sick and ailing.''

 of course! you're bidden there next week.''
 ``it seems that he forgot us all.''
 at any hour escape his cell.''
 and sat down by the window-sill.''
 Did I not love the Little Woman.''
 that he's not honest past all question.''
 good night; I swear I'll lie down soon.''
 a dumb moon, on a dumb horizon.''
 as instituted long ago.''
 ``You know him, do you?'' ``Yes and no.''
 ``You yawn, Onegin?'' ``As I'm used to.''
 open the window, sit down near.''
 servant of God, and Brigadier.''
 Present me, please.'' ``You're joking.'' ``Never.''
 it's yes or no, but never sir.''

 ``She knows you?'' ``Why, we lived next door.''

 ``My sweet, God warrants me your debtor.''
 ``Come to me in my golden halls.''
 it's not in him to bring me bliss.''
 ``A place where you'll find none of us.''
 They will receive us with delight.''
 ``I don't see what's so bad about it.''
 ``Goodbye, Onegin, time I went.''
 It's right and proper that you went.''
 or borrow, say, from me, if not.''
 even to count them throws me out.''
 watch the games we maidens play.''
 just send your grandson on his way.''
 ``My dear good sir, I'm short of money.''
 lately he married off his boy.''

 they all have richly earned a pension;''

 ``But tell me, which one was Tatyana?''
 ``How did you come to marry, nyanya?''
 you in my arms on gingerbread?''
 is in your poetry enshrined?''
 my fate, it leads me to what end?''
 amazement: ``Where's your second gone?''
 I do, I do. Well, where's he gone?''
 ``Tell me, what's your companion doing?''
 your dashing one, is she surviving?''
 were you in love when you were young?''
 asked Lensky: ``Should we start, I mean?''
 ``Look quickly to the left, d'you hear?''
 Grandison, cousin, d'you remember?''
 ``Could I just see the house, I wonder?''
 ``The one you love's the younger daughter?''

 ``Look to the left? where? what's the matter?''

 of seeing the world? what on earth could be better?''
 ``Qu'&eacute;crirez-vous sur ces tablettes?''
 killing each evening off like that?''
 the one who killed the youthful poet?''
 but where are all your evenings spent?''
 who was it that you dreamt about?''
 ``How can one not love mother Moscow?''
 ``Last night, what made you fly so early?''
 Why have you gone all pale and queasy?''
 here, seize it quick for this quatrain!)
 (The libretto of the opera, which was written and first performed more than forty years after Pushkin's death, is by Chaykovsky himself and Konstantin Shilovsky, a minor poet of the time. It is nominally based on Pushkin's text, but in fact the relationship is not very close.)
 of time between the wolf and dog.)
 behind deceit or double-dealing?)
 talk that might turn a young girl's head)

 His father died; and (as expected)

 (if you'll turn back to chapter one)
 (Tir&eacute; d'une lettre particuli&egrave;re)
 (like passion's dream, that other revel)
 I know (and seek your exculpation)
 Rousseau (forgive a short distraction)
 their breed would (some years after this)
 (a simile of this and that)
 but she (for women, that's not new)
 herself not knowing how or why)
 (critical judges, strict as any)
 paterfamilias (unwed),
 (it's all the same - you well correct us),
 Believe (as conscience is my warrant),
 fate could be something else again..,
 I weep, and pray for your protection..,

 She folds the page, lays down the plume.,

 In stead of happiness, say I,
 diversely urging the same plea,
 Moscow, loved daughter of Russia,
 Friends of my Ruslan and Lyudmila,
 album and stays, Princess Alina,
 ``Akulka'' the onetime Selina,
 swapped it for odd tomes of Malvina,
 arch-rake, pothouse tribune-persona,
 a liar still, Lyub&oacute;v Petrovna,
 still powdered is Luk&eacute;rya Lvovna,
 Diana's breast, the cheeks of Flora,
 Idol mio or Benedetta,
 Tatyana on; Miss Kharlikova,
 My mind is fuddled.'' ``Tell me, nyanya,

 and rest his dear bones in the tomb,

 Iv&aacute;n Petr&oacute;vich still is dumb,
 or for a lamentable manic,
 a monster of the gens Satanic,
 Is Others' View,5 that clever lyric,
 Through the tight ranks - aristocratic,
 But soft! You hear? A scowling critic,
 themes popular or idealistic,
 from threads both sad and humoristic,
 the elegy, grown paralytic,
 boo Phaedra out as paralytic,
 and for belle Nina, as it read,
 tries out the ice with cautious tread,
 But that's enough. At once, in stead,
 Tatyana simply lay in bed,
 where admonitions are pronounced,

 where nowadays I'm soundly trounced,

 The horses, as they sense the dead,
 The happiness of youth is dead,
 with storm and tumult in his head,
 in friendly gatherings where I read,
 on which a carpet has been spread,
 but now grown plain and kind in stead,
 one smoothes the pillows down in bed,
 At last he wakes, and stirs in bed,
 on a small bench by Tanya's bed,
 in sultry sleep, in lonely bed,
 loved someone else, not her intended,
 ``You know, it's true, how I attended,
 In the two sisters' rooms extended,
 amongst the crafty and small-minded,

 Here stands, with shady park surrounded,

 in the saloon, brocade-surrounded,
 Her father, kindly, well-regarded,
 but in an earlier age retarded,
 Eugene, with solemn face, paid heed,
 touches obliquely, but with speed,
 the draught whose blessings are agreed,
 midst crones with endless tears to shed,
 ``Whither, oh whither are ye banished,
 Oh, when, and to what desert banished,
 have other maidens, since you vanished,
 my little feet, where have you vanished,
 that table where the lamp has languished,
 people there were he glorified,
 but suddenly a snowdrift rumbled,
 and what came out? a hairy, tumbled,

 the pangs with which his heart was troubled,

 Meanwhile with pain her soul was girdled,
 the samovar of evening boiled,
 enormous bear; Tatyana yelled,
 Yet once for him her thoughts had whirled,
 His hair was fashionably curled,
 in quilted dressing-gown adorned,
 her girlhood games; in them he'd shared,
 on Olga; from heart's ache still spared,
 Or, as by Lethe's bank he slumbered,
 however much her soul has faltered,
 I don't mean that she never shivered,
 no, even her eyebrow never quivered,
 he almost lost his mind, expired,
 threw Eugene at her feet - she stirred,

 his nature would be changed and steadied,

 hymnal as, endlessly unfurled,
 he watched the guests and, as he dined,
 and in the country, blissful, horned,
 as something not to be declared,
 at twenty, was a fop inbred,
 The aunts exchanged a look, they fluttered,
 it was that he'd been truly stirred,
 deep in Moldavia the abhorred,
 she brought her talents, never ceased,
 hold half the world still unreleased,
 when, on the plain, green herbs are massed,
 of inexperience would have passed,
 Unforced, as conversation passed,
 she's their great friend, asked in, caressed,
 Still on the board, the beakers hissed,

 is in voluptuous languor dressed,

 struck down as if she'd been accused,
 He thought that Olga'd be confused,
 to whom your hearts are dedicated,
 and Fly&aacute;nov, amply lubricated,
 its nullity I've always hated,
 by all is sweetly mutilated,
 on waves of far niente floated,
 Seeing Vladimir had defected,
 The tomcat, mannered and affected,
 a bit provincial and affected,
 his strangeness, wholly unaffected,
 He sang of love, to love subjected,
 which held him silently subjected,
 she'd never join the game selected,

 a park, enormous and neglected,

 around Priam the much-respected,
 However closely he inspected,
 they find her somewhat unexpected,
 and the churchyard where, new-erected,
 of five more steps they went, slow-gaited,
 now, by green tablecloths awaited,
 Where is the fire that once ignited,
 Winter!... The countryman, enchanted,
 Sometimes a landscape's represented,
 a tomb, a Cyprian shrine's invented,
 To harmless idleness devoted,
 at earliest morning out she started,
 And long, as if through mists that spurted,
 with grave goodbyes to the bereaved,
 Lensky has watched: his rage has blazed,

 Between the lines of text as printed,

 From that rough spell at last exempted,
 treaties of nations long departed,
 of this our novel we reported,
 and happy licence are allowed,
 by sluggish Lethe may be swallowed,
 after the martyr's price it paid,
 So my Zaretsky, as I said,
 this Grandison of hers was splendid,
 Still in the porch, exhausted-stupid,
 on springtime grasses of the field,
 under the table's linen shield,
 Boston and ombre for the old,
 ``My sweet, my dearest heart, I'm old,
 had made his name, when, bold as bold,

 the ancients have gone stiff and cold,

 Is he a Melmoth, a Childe Harold,
 We each have enemies in this world,
 ditties of our secret world,
 ditty of our secret world,
 in manifesting, as he could,
 spying my features, as he could,
 of calculated slander should,
 to the princess, in his weak hand,
 now warmth and blossom are on hand,
 a Lancer wooed and won her hand,
 put a strong staff into my hand,
 in front of you, on every hand,
 sometimes, in reverie's sacred land,
 long, lively tales from wonderland,
 a true companion to the end,

 we weep for the young lover's end,

 whoever you may be, a friend,
 But don't be cross, my darling friend,
 Bordeaux, you're like a faithful friend,
 if you'd still been with me, dear friend,
 still has Monsieur Finemouche for friend,
 he leaves a tender verse behind,
 his tea with rum quite left behind,
 cold, pure as ice, and as unkind,
 with pots and basins out of mind,
 your Tanya's image in your mind,
 ``Get up: it's gone six! I'll be bound,
 and also prettier, I'll be bound,
 she stopped at the loud torrent's bound,
 though there he's no more to be found,

 a corpse on boards was all he found,

 I'll make them spar another round,
 by Naiads, one foot on the ground,
 and the poet, without a sound,
 his heart was plunged! A sudden sound,
 frenzy which wrecks our lives for sound,
 She hates a friendly voice's sound,
 and listen for the heart's first sound,
 honest devotion to the good,
 as gage of all things that were good,
 of leaves that autumn killed for good,
 she guards, in silence and for good,
 And then she broods and mopes for good,
 fancy, a wine serene in mood,
 he fell in love with darkest wildwood,
 perfervid language of the bard,

 which Ovid sang, for which the bard,

 condemned to a lifetime of hard,
 and dead ideas from that old hoard,
 Eugene attends the boulevard,
 as yours did, Homer, godlike lord,
 and looked at him without a word,
 of trumpet, dagger, mask and sword,
 Melpomene wails long and loud,
 before a cold, indifferent crowd,
 But ours, whatever he might be,
 swam on the river's dreaming face,
 into the all&eacute;e, face to face,
 of our first meeting face to face,
 did any glasses seek her face,
 has made the park her brooding-place,

 from young Tatyana's dwelling-place,

 in through the door, at swallow's pace,
 each took four steps across the space,
 alone across the fields of space,
 she speeds her footsteps to a race,
 a soul of sympathy and grace,
 and then, with an enchanting grace,
 of recompense beyond endurance,
 Spoilt by the habit of indulgence,
 with irresistible refulgence,
 raised a dull eye to moon's refulgence,
 now dazzled by one thing's effulgence,
 An unknown yard, she sees from thence,
 Without romance, or false insistence,
 as helpmeet in my sad existence,
 for him a lofty stair. His shade,

 just now of wrestling with his shade,

 here's boredom, madness or pretence,
 From his first youth he'd known the force,
 the coolness of the sombre glade,
 &lt; amongst the soulless men of pride,
 she sits down calmly on one side,
 the new moon, horned, on her left side,
 Friend of my heart, be at my side,
 perfidious blow to my inside,
 And now the door is opened wide,
 now sensitive, and now carefree,
 each springtime, on the growing tree,
 Onegin too - and there to see,
 the climacteric of our life,
 always contented with his life,

 the lies that in the press run rife,

 at first, with God knows whom to see,
 Now here's a letter, as you see,
 the peaceful Muses' devotee,
 where civil treacheries are rife,
 his children and his faithful wife,
 and with no post, no work, no wife,
 are bound, by every virtuous wife,
 has found a port for his old age,
 good-looking, in the flower of age,
 are entered here, in friendship's gage,
 and lives, a veritable sage,
 as was the old suspicious sage,
 through baseness of the soul that he,
 a rambling walk beside my lake,
 on tragedy; but it's no joke,

 all this, at eighteen years of age,

 that nubile maid of riper age,
 mountains are piled on every carriage,
 the solitude of woods and tillage,
 He's gone away and left his village,
 of their society turned her savage,
 where he was master of his college,
 Was it to no effect that he,
 took her to his estate, where she,
 death on his brow, your friend should lie,
 Five versts or so from Krasnog&oacute;rie,
 that soul without a moral tie,
 just at this crisis of his gale,
 in question, gossip, news and tale,
 the leather rein, to learn the tale,

 value the hero of my tale,

 But from the hero of my tale,
 in talk, so fruitless and so stale,
 his virulence that made you smile,
 Yet sweeter far, at such a time,
 recalling earlier loves, did we,
 we were swept off, in reverie's haze,
 and then a boat, with oars a-swinging,
 his life till dawn's already making,
 just sentries to each other calling,
 So, like Childe Harold, glum, unpleasing,
 no glance so sweet, no sigh so teasing,
 I longed, like every breaker hissing,
 and when its waters were not showing,
 How often, when the sky was glowing,
 Uncle, in bed, and near to dying,

 soon, infidelity proved cloying,

 my Africa,18 where waves break high,
 so pure, so spotless through and through,
 and scorned his fellows through and through,
 his Strasbourg pie, or point a moral,
 he stood there, pensive and forgetful,
 Evgeny stood, with soul regretful,
 oppressed by emptiness of soul,
 the magic voices of your stream,
 retired, as he, from fashion's stream,
 some ladies preach from Say and Bentham,
 It's true, I'll not misrepresent them,
 so virtuous that, no sooner seen,
 and with a yawn took up his pen,
 something like spleen, that scourge of Britain,

 days that are lost behind the curtain,

 Idle again by dedication,
 Evgeny, hating litigation,
 hear, once more filled with inspiration,
 with shelves of books deployed for action,
 for him all sham has found rejection,
 he's gnawed by serpent Recollection,
 drink in the midnight benediction,
 and then it's tea that comes to mention,
 Escaped from social rhyme and reason,
 can chatter, and be silent too,
 punctilious in his cotton cap,
 land where I learned to love and weep,
 and more than once the German baker,
 with brilliant conquests by the shower,
 no, nothing caused his heart to stir,

 as fast as post-horses could go,

 yet, as each rule has its exception,
 so pious, and so clever too,
 I walk the shore,17 I watch the weather,
 exercised, under lucre's banner,
 his freedom, in his youth's first flower,
 but, when he'd rushed to Uncle's manor,
 Exhausted by the ballroom's clamour,
 he sleeps, away from glare and glamour,
 of the dull shores of my disfavour,
 to mourn for Russia's gloomy savour,
 on most occasions between friends,
 and by Repentance. All this lends,
 recalling earlier time's romances,
 But friendship, as between our heroes,

 old prejudice; all men are zeros,

 they're all chained up in different fetters,
 He'd given up girls - now gave up letters,
 And what's more, they're so supercilious,
 so circumspect, and so punctilious,
 blue smoke of chimneys goes aloft,
 by Neva, on a summer night,
 converting morning to midnight,
 should have been analysed when caught,
 full of his usual pith and wit,
 But was it happy, his employment,
 and satisfied with what he'd got,
 made over to them his whole lot,
 Friendship, as I must own to you,
 already yawned before the show,
 Beneath storm's vestment, on the seaway,

 Proud Albion's lyre is what I follow,

 always monotonously gay,
 battling along that watery freeway,
 his mind, in judgement still unsteady,
 and there, beneath your noonday sky,
 for in our time, beyond dubiety,
 over the Petersburg pav&eacute; --
 and always the inspired regard --
 and though he liked a fiery quarrel --
 finding in that no deprivation --
 with such a blissful, brief infection --
 ghostlike, must trouble him who feels --
 to life grew colder than the dead.
 the moderns rage against the old.
 for quite a while by fortune's hand.

 an offering ready for the ground.

 old Uncle's end was soon to be.
 the usurers' voracious tribe.
 feelings he valued - from outside.
 his epigrams topped up with bile.
 since I'm a member of the same.
 the highest circles are a bore.
 his mind, so cold and so precise.
 with Eugene proved a tempting prize.
 a great attraction to conversing.
 to smother her dear feet with kissing.
 the tongue of love and of Petrarch.
 of the most harmless, hopeless trash.
 in taffeta of mourning black.
 ``it's time!'' and freedom hears my hail.
 I signal to each passing sail.

 the units are ourselves alone.

 its natural right to rave and flare.
 just as the Poet15 paints himself.
 came distant horns, and gallant singing.
 wished him to come and say farewell.
 between their girls and this half-Russian.
 at once they give a man the spleen.
 in lives that were just dawning then.
 through it they're known to me, and kin.
 I was Onegin's friend that season.
 blooms when there's nothing else to do.
 has opened up his serving-trap.
 land where my heart is buried deep.
 and nothing pierced his senses' blur.
 and granite, were so far apart.

 became like brother knit to brother.

 So, verse and prose, they came together.
 feeling is quaint, and fit for fools.
 to the beginning of our days.
 this child of luxury and delight.
 with sabre's slash, and bullet's blast.
 and crisply crunch the morning snow.
 tomorrow just like yesterday.
 To private tastes we each subscribe:
 was his; we'd both drunk passion's chalice:
 from the agent, with this tale to tell:
 untirable, at sound of drum:
 he read, and read - no satisfaction:
 then, help me God, she caterwauls:
 objective of his thoughts and joys:
 (my tale's beginning here repeats);

 on the dull life that bachelors lead;

 both hearts to blaze had now expired;
 with me to see an alien strand;
 from Million Street16 came floating round;
 you were the first ones he forswore;
 and he was bored with social noise;
 here there's no conscience, here no sense;
 from Boston's cloth or gossip's quote;
 and leant upon the granite shelf;
 Then, after midday he'll be waking;
 such is the usual country cooking;
 towards his stall, the pedlar's hawking;
 Silence was everywhere enthralling;
 to Eugene all was new and thrilling;
 to his disputing and his cursing;

 and friends and friendship, soul-destroying;

 even without me it will sink;
 of other's thought - a splendid goal;
 no word came flowing from his quill;
 O Brenta, I'll see you in dream;
 your molten gold, your charmed infusion;
 I'll float in gondola's seclusion;
 O Adrian waves, my invocation;
 it mastered him in slow gradation;
 Napoleon's our sole inspiration;
 the universe is all perfection;
 and Dunya works the samovar;
 The city's early sounds awake her;
 rendered them tedious to each other;
 by any itch for marriage ties;
 to scorn the men with whom he deals;

 for us are instruments and tools;

 with cranium aching fit to split;
 when shall I start on my escape?
 When comes my moment to untether?
 XLVII
 XLVI
 L
 At first Onegin's tongue produced
 our lives were flat, and what had fired
 Like convicts in a dream released
 a haze in me, but I grew used
 instead the chance to get acquainted
 The bitterness was mine - the ice
 there waited for us both the malice
 It's time to drop astern the shape

 he ended even your employment;

 or Russia's chondria, for short;
 at feasts, was strong and fancy-free?
 and every day its own enjoyment?
 LIII
 XLIII
 XLVIII
 XXXVIII
 XIII
 LII
 (XXXIX, XL, XLI,) XLII
 XXXVII
 LI
 XVI
 XXXVI
 XLIV

 XIV

 XLV
 XV
 XLIX
 to blow his brains out, but in stead
 before Onegin there collected
 Lensky of course was quite untainted
 but soon the ways we trod were parted
 Eugene would willingly have started
 and then a drozhky's clopping sound
 or else, from far off, he could see
 and set off prompter than a whistle
 Evgeny read the sad epistle
 which I myself won't praise or blame
 youth is a fever; we must spare

 folly for me to interfere

 Vladimir, wealthy and good-looking,
 ``The man's a boor; his brain is missing,
 while Petersburg's already rousing,
 freedom's enthusiastic dream,
 from German realms of mist and steam,
 he's a freemason too; for him,
 I grasp a stirrup with affection,
 an urge to sleep; soon, clear as clear,
 was G&ouml;ttingen, his alma mater,
 the total ownership of woods,
 although there are no streets, no cards,
 came driving to his country seat,
 sharpness of wit, and social art,
 the expanse of fields, so wide, so lonely,
 boredom has just as sure an entry,

 Yes, spleen was waiting like a sentry,

 till then had been dispersed and wasted --
 drew scrutiny no less complete --
 upon the side of the distaff --
 was asked around as quite a catch --
 red wine in tumblers to the brim --
 It all seemed new - for two days only --
 the murmur where the streamlet played...
 for his old courses to be changed.
 as if some goal had been achieved.
 just like a shadow, or a wife.
 a poet, and a Kantian sage.
 relations off, and never spoke.
 that was less clever still by half.
 The vote was passed without demur.

 no mansions, no ballrooms, no bards.

 two cupboards, one divan, a table,
 He sang of grief and parting-time,
 O flowers, and love, and rustic leisure,
 that, meanwhile, pinched and glum of feature,
 has voices that are more resounding,
 fancies once more are hotly bubbling,
 my thoughtless pen has stopped designing,
 I write, my heart has ceased its pining,
 a spirit strange, a spirit burning,
 And Eugene? half-awake, half-drowsing,
 through heaven's expanse serenely flying,
 an eloquence of fevered strength,
 invariably, as time went on,
 Their talk, so sound on every matter,
 the Muses' lofty arts and fashions,

 on liquor, and on hay brought in,

 but all concurred that, truth to speak,
 the other, jugs of applejack,
 the flaming roses of a cheek,
 So now be off to Neva's brink,
 the mountain maiden,19 my ideal,
 the world's &eacute;clat, its thunder-roll,
 Schiller and Goethe had refined him,
 immortals picked by fate for when,
 of human friendship, holy men,
 on kennels, and on kith and kin,
 on a fast stallion from the Don,
 But, now I've praised the queens of fashion,
 All this has now gone out of fashion,
 A thinker in a desert mission,

 The manor house, in deep seclusion,

 screened by a hill from storm's intrusion,
 Compassion, yes, and indignation,
 ``Whose glance, provoking inspiration,
 bitter-sweet glory's inspiration,
 it had no sparkle of sensation,
 I've drawn a plan and a projection,
 Poets, I'll say in this connection,
 there's far too much of contradiction,
 their hand to grapple slander's cup,
 villages flickered far and near,
 In heart's affairs, a sweet beginner,
 it led him, in these early sessions,
 Alone amid all his possessions,
 a book of household calculations,
 I'm grieving still, but no more tears,

 such shadowy and leisured ways,

 The rustic sage, in that apartment,
 it lacked, of course, poetic heart,
 the blood within my withered heart,
 something to rack his brains about,
 another's grin was sly and shifty,
 the noise their rustic wheels projected --
 spread out its shadow all around --
 he sang of lifetime's yellowed page --
 earn for me the rewards of fame --
 and, with it, forced renown to come --
 was still mysterious and enticing --
 a modish taste, a dowdy touch --
 of neighbouring owners of the earth --
 --------

 in terms of poetry or passion --

 fruits of my labour and my ink...
 once more the love, once more the smart...
 but I, in love, was dull and dumb.
 already stirred him as they should.
 the pensive Dryads' hiding-ground.
 when not quite eighteen years of age.
 but I refuse to chop or change.
 I roam by the secluded lake.
 12 Constantinople.
 in sensible old-fashioned style.
 to institute a new regime.
 poetic dreams, a brighter fire.
 18 ``The author, on his mother's side, is of African descent...'' Pushkin's note.
 17 ``Written at Odessa.'' Pushkin's note.
 4 ``Well-known restaurateur.'' Pushkin's note.

 1 ``Written in Bessarabia.'' Pushkin's note.

 and stoves with tiles of various hue.
 that queen of secrets and of sighing.
 will in my soul be hushed and dying.
 and captive girls, by Salgir20 lying.
 both set him yawning just as much.
 and raven curls of shoulder-length.
 20 River in the Crimea. The reference is to the harem girls in Pushkin's poem The Fountain of Bakhchisarai.
 he was a menace, and a freak.
 at any other sort of book.
 still captivated his young soul.
 the charm of what was grave and plain.
 the thought of volatile renown.
 19 Refers to the Circassian girl in Pushkin's poem The Caucasian Prisoner.
 look through the pane, and squash the flies.
 no trace of ink, no spots, no stains.

 would bless the form his fortune took.

 7 Heroine of Ozerov's tragedy Fingal.
 adore the love that comes in dream.
 5 Hussar and friend of Pushkin.
 11 Ballerina, once courted by Pushkin.
 2 Stanzas IX, XIII, XIV, XXXIX, XL and XLI were omitted by Pushkin.
 the hero's name's decided too.
 10 Dancer and choreographer.
 3 Hero of Louvet's novel about betrayed husbands.
 8 Playwrights of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
 an ode in twenty-five cantos.
 at a friend's word, a girl's caress.
 are just as nimble as their feet.
 6 Vintage 1811, the year of the Comet.
 16 Millyonaya, a street parallel to the Neva, and one block away from it.
 his serfs rejoicing at their lot.
 o fields - to you I'm vowed at heart.
 13 French encyclopedist.
 suspecting wonders would come out.
 9 Actress in tragedy.
 14 Pushkin leaves blank the name of Onegin's model dandy.
 shine out and bring the world to bliss. &gt;2
 of light that flowering fields reflected:

 The censor's tribute, I'll arrange:
 befitting such a noble pile:
 to pass the time was Eugene's theme:

 enough of my loquacious lyre:

 Oak-floored, and simple as a stable:
 was an enchanting country nook:
 then from the Muse there came revival:
 excited not a hint of passion:
 Another page of recollection:
 to freedom, softness and enjoyment:
 High ceilings everywhere abounded;
 I feel a small foot in my hand;
 of mind got clarity new-found;
 emotion, thought, and magic sound;
 fortunate one, he'd not disgrace;
 of every funeral far and wide;
 that fired his soul, to burn the same;
 of something vague, some misty clime;
 from ball to bed behold him come;

 consequences of hideous woe;

 by the cold world's corrupt finesse;
 would be allied to him by fate;
 but ladies' hands are not for kissing;
 roses romantically blowing;
 his sobs, where his live tears were flowing;
 dead ash sets no more sparks a-flying;
 only to Eugene showed their worth;
 my soul in secret gave survival;
 He roamed the world, his lyre behind him;
 in his defence, and smash it up;
 he fed on hope's deceptive dinner;
 The yard was bursting with dependants;
 of ladies' heads, and ladies' feet;
 from day to day she could but wait;

 the uncertainties within his heart;

 inspires your lute to sounds of sighing?
 of jealous girls, devote its strain?
 that once I spent my happiest days?
 I
 II
 III
 VIII
 LVIII
 VII
 LVII
 XII
 VI
 LVI
 XI
 V

 IV

 LIV
 XXXIV
 LV
 XXXV
 X
 IX
 LIX
 LX
 and, in the district, this persona
 and glad he was he'd thus arranged
 fever of rhyme: thereby he's doubled
 they buried Uncle, congregated
 to eat and drink, then separated
 He was too young to have been blighted

 as infant sleep, or the unaffected

 once on the highway he'd detected
 his soul still blossomed out, and lighted
 Eugene turned countryman. He tasted
 a stride on Petrarch's path, allayed
 interior d&eacute;cor in the end
 I don't know why, but for my friend
 rewards the music of your mind
 but in his songs kept pride of place
 Horace
 &lt; that there existed, for the indulgence
 poetry's sacred frenzy, made
 there gathered at the coffin-side
 who can combine it with the free
 and dutifully shared his life
 of love's anxiety. Blessed is he

 And every morning I awake

 they took offence at this, and broke
 the charge that poets are unable
 put back the libel on the table
 and theirs was the poetic flame
 peopled my sleep, and to their theme
 Notes to Chapter One
 his song was limpid in its tune
 he saw that, as in cities, here
 and cattle roamed the plain, and here
 No, never in the hottest fire
 they don't deserve what they inspire
 of boiling youth did I desire
 self-portraits only - furthermore
 I regularly take much pleasure

 there any friend of harmless pleasure

 The place where Eugene loathed his leisure
 He was convinced, a kindred creature
 and country stillness: there the lyre
 forty years long would criticise
 That's when I'll sit down to compose
 with any torture so exquisite
 he stalked the drawing-rooms, remote
 He sweetened up with fancy's icing
 No, I was born for peace abounding
 the merchant's up, the cabman's walking
 gripped him no more; soon they were raising
 that from the backdoor he'd be leaving
 At first they called; but on perceiving
 In fact one day a note came flying
 the third day, wood and hill and grazing

 beside unfinished lines, a suite

 where in the heart of silence rang
 of many distant lands he sang
 once more that touch is fiercely troubling
 he struggled to bite back the chilling
 No, early on his heart was cooling
 no, not for long were belles the ruling
 He'd brought back all the fruits of learning
 and all the neighbours planned a match
 is finished, and I've looked it through
 but by and large their talk's a hash
 fruit liqueurs and an Almanack
 and hid the bookshelf's dusty stack
 to kiss Armida's lips, or seek
 of virgin fancy, and again

 of raging passion's surge and roll

 with fond caress? whose adoration
 Meanwhile my novel's opening section
 meticulously; in my fiction
 not every day could he wash down
 Love passed, the Muse appeared, the weather
 now free, I once more weave together
 I'll feed the journalists for dinner
 you newborn work, and like a winner
 Meanwhile another new landowner
 Vladimir Lensky, whose creator
 for the sublime, and for the passions
 and soon, oh soon the storm's arrears
 I suffered once from all the madness
 No one's, I swear by God! in sadness
 or languid bosoms; and no visit

 looked on a river: far away

 but meanwhile let him live, and think
 had left the squire no time to look
 from her my lips will learn and mark
 my carefree song would thus reveal
 To whom do you, from all the train
 As soon as he appears, discussion
 In time past, objects of affection
 he changed the corv&eacute;e of tradition
 thoughts of a girl, or as the moon
 his beefsteak with champagne, or drown
 a frequent question: ``tell me who
 and soon they bring her... a guitar
 You too, prime beauties in your flower
 for 1808: his obligations

 The illness with which he'd been smitten

 thank God, he had no inclination
 and logic; yet the conversation
 it stood, defiant of destruction
 The ch&acirc;teau was of a construction
 sleep much, read little, and put down
 myself and Eugene, lest a reader
 of mocking turn, or else a breeder
 word on his lips, and thought: it's sheer
 mills, lands and waters - he whose goods
 And of the cupboards, one contains
 in sighs and boredom and deceits
 friends, foes, priests, guests, inured attendants
 Lensky disliked the entertainments
 But in that desert his attainments
 their looks and language in deceit

 his housekeeper and her department

 Was it not in such sweet employment
 for him, the objective on life's chart
 in showing how to tell apart
 yet he fell out of love at last
 And now, my friends, I hear from you
 that, like proud Byron, I can draw
 ancestral1 portraits met the view
 neighbour was sure, from this would flow
 before it was the golden play
 He smiled as Lensky talked: the heady
 and he believed his friends were ready
 to put on chains for him, and steady
 to sing of others must imply
 But, in a fearful huff, his thrifty

 of blind Fortuna and of men

 of work made him feel sick, and still
 I liked his quality, the dream
 locked himself up inside his den
 Italian nights, when I'll drink in
 He who has lived and thought is certain
 he failed to join that sharp profession
 and tried to write, but a hard session
 the millions of two-legged creation
 he strove to achieve the appropriation
 from gaol to greenwood, by such fiction
 More tolerant in his conception
 can't really be: for we've outgrown
 see with their jugs the milk-girls go
 with a Venetian maiden who
 and in retreat from all enjoyment

 No ice and flame, no stormy weather

 by drozhkies jaunting at full power
 of Dian's visage, in our fancies
 shutters are opened and the soft
 in their gay glass, the borrowed light
 into a small quit-rent - and got
 At first, disparity of heart
 than most. Evgeny, though he knew
 then liking grew, then every day
 who late at night are whirled away
 they met on horseback; quickly they
 {50}
 {53}
 {54}
 {69}

 {70}

 {60}
 {51}
 {61}
 {52}
 {62}
 {63}
 {64}
 {55}
 {65}
 {56}
 {66}
 {67}
 {58}
 {68}
 {59}

 {57}

 ``What of them, Tanya? I was able,
 a skeleton jerked by a cable,
 Prepared for prophecy and fable,
 a grammar, a digest of fable,
 to wreck a maiden's sleep with fable,
 a group of monsters round a table,
 the iron figure3 on the table,
 Porcelain and bronzes on the table,
 cooked-up where garret-vermin babble,
 endorsed by fashionable rabble,
 When out to burst a rival's bubble,
 or cause the bursting of his bubble,
 How early he'd learnt to dissemble,
 of sunlight makes it flash and crumble,

 Sometimes his tricks would earn him trouble,

 Then in return for all this twaddle,
 a steed responsive to the bridle,
 Tatyana had no dolls to dandle,
 bored by success' giddy trifle,
 not even by chance, once in a while,
 he even dares, once in a while,
 will the benighted reason smile,
 emboldened by his Olga's smile,
 scarce out of bibs, already fickle,
 fresh from the cot, an infant pickle,
 The hall is full of noise and hustle,
 for dreams, or journalistic battle,
 would cause widespread remark and tattle,
 and glumly serves the medicine bottle,
 And the sly baseness, fit to throttle,

 dons of Epicurean rule,

 he killed eight years in such a style,
 unnoticed, in unseeing style,
 young Tanya first appeared to me,
 He destined Olga's hand for me,
 I've no one here who comprehends me,
 and now a swooning mind attends me,
 an old man saw her as she came,
 that there be just one voice which came,
 become a joke to us, its game,
 you'd not so much as know the name,
 though Menelaus, in Helen's name,
 while men, all sombre, all the same,
 the hapless Phrygians all the same,
 freezes my blood... Yet all the same,

 and part in kindness? Just the same,

 felicitously every theme,
 summits of aspen, birch and lime,
 no beauties of a foreign clime,
 she won't inhale the powdered rime,
 the horror of disgrace and crime,
 youthful, who ripened in his time,
 where are the reveries this time,
 for her, no joy from winter-time,
 pointed each year, for time to come,
 to me her best in-quarto tome,
 love's melting dreams shall fill my rhyme,
 Tatyana breathed on the cold pane,
 of powers unripe, or on the wane,
 that king of the satiric scene,
 Olga's appeared upon the scene,

 and Lensky follows her... Eugene,

 of whispering woods where my Eugene,
 moved and surprised, she stays serene,
 left her to follow her own line,
 Tatyana, lonely heroine,
 in secret judgement what he'd done,
 with work at home; but when he'd gone,
 of the whole world, her nurse alone,
 in deepest grasses, quite alone,
 ``And here's the hearth,'' explains the crone,
 are coloured in a single tone,
 of modish belles the modish foe,
 I can see naught, as Hymen's foe,
 her darling foot of its wet shoe,
 From here, deep-sunk in pensive woe,

 right in the flower of joyous hope,

 Just let yourself be your whole care,
 Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;, the mediocre,
 closely embraced, in wending here,
 beneath the stone reposes here,
 her drops of tears, and seated there,
 and where's her sister now? and where,
 its own perfection everywhere,
 to wreak, by stirring Lensky's ire,
 and found her dreams, her secret fire,
 is either the distrait Vampire,
 to hear what latest modes require,
 their hands are dipped in scarlet gore,
 From all sweet things that gave me pleasure,
 by moonlight two young girls took pleasure,
 thank you for sorrow and for pleasure,

 But in misfortune or displeasure,

 And then, to part us in full measure,
 the secret of her husband's measure,
 so it was not in any measure,
 Thank you for all the gifts I treasure,
 time was, in evening hours of leisure,
 it touched with reverie her leisure,
 she calls down curses on their leisure,
 And so, at last, feature by feature,
 the hall's without a living creature,
 it's also true, in battle's rapture,
 some vote a doctor for the case,
 his pistols, laid them in their case,
 then afterwards, alone, at ease,
 her out-of-fashion turns of phrase,

 with heart that's grown unused to praise,

 and Grandison beyond compare,
 she found, in labours and in leisure,
 gentlemanly, quite precise,
 have vanished, like an empty noise,
 smiles, and a maiden's tranquil poise,
 or, with an epigram-surprise,
 no matter: hope, in child's disguise,
 prepares himself; and then his verse,
 of oligarchical converse,
 compact of amorous trash, and worse,
 so, cursing women's devious course,
 within her bosom to abate,
 for you have, at this early date,
 looked down in an access of hate,
 to fashion's absolute dictate,

 in loaded carriages, migrate,

 of pity for my wretched state,
 He saw the sad girl's trembling state,
 of plains where boredom reigns complete,
 here a weak version, incomplete,
 the murmuring Nereids recite,
 roofs, flowerbeds, fences, all in white,
 a patriot, a cosmopolite,
 proficiency to speak and write,
 a grey-haired, perfumed exquisite,
 that's the morass, I beg you note,
 still filled with Eugene, Tanya wrote,
 yes, focus on them your lorgnette,
 stood in the door, cherubic, mute,
 on billiard-table rests a cue,

 already studying to intrigue,

 unhesitating from her tongue,
 to cool my glances and my tongue,
 of a provincial ing&eacute;nue,
 ourselves on our landfall. It's true,
 am always glad to write, it's true,
 this very day I'd gladly give,
 the glare, the fumes in which I live,
 Such feckless passion - as I live,
 whose heart on dreams was wont to thrive,
 not cold, but also not effusive,
 she was unhurried, unobtrusive,
 he found Tatyana so attractive,
 what can one do? as said above,
 vexation? vainness? heavens above,
 frightened to death a timid love,

 to meet his thirsty lips... What daze,

 and set on hating the coquette,
 homestead, before her parents' gaze,
 arrives, the girl's exhausted gaze,
 looks at him with a steady gaze,
 her eyes are lowered, but ablaze,
 and all into the salon squeeze,
 each moral puts us in a doze,
 she once had pined in girlish grief,
 yet, truthfully and not in chaff,
 and took two Petriads in calf,
 he charged three roubles and a half,
 he never took one from the shelf,
 odd volumes from the devil's shelf,
 a suite of elegies that, throbbing,

 The ploughman there delights to doze,

 at Cleopatra, hiss her off,
 is forced to crucify himself,
 the bliss that fills me when your throbbing,
 How heavy, and how near to sobbing,
 to his Tatyana, yes, he's racing,
 What happened? Though his eyes were reading,
 the barbs that envy's always spreading,
 what's in them? All this loud parading,
 and all this flashy masquerading,
 that poisonous worm, despised, degrading,
 he stoops and, tenderly confiding,
 he steers her, nonchalantly gliding,
 They're settled in; and crawling, sliding,
 On the seashore, with storm impending,
 ``The peasants there have wealth abounding,

 Tanya (profoundly Russian being,

 the utter virtue of their being,
 in the expression of its being,
 but piteous he, the all-foreseeing,
 a word or two, or stare unseeing,
 In swarms around Tatyana ranging,
 she loved the steppe-land and its singing,
 its echoes, its belated urging,
 its wayward tricks, its violent surging,
 to whom, in a fine flow of preaching,
 he had conveyed some moral teaching,
 our troikas effortlessly dashing,
 Then our Automedons are flashing,
 Below it, when sprang rains are swishing,
 but wildly still her heart is rushing,

 Elbow on table, spirit seething,

 Not so? ``No, sirs, the ode's the thing,
 the foes, cold-blooded and unspeaking,
 and growing thicker; then, heart-shaking,
 over the business of leave-taking,
 Next day Tatyana, early waking,
 ``oh, quit your stale, your tedious quacking,
 spurs of Chevalier Gardes are clinking,
 incendiary looks are slinking,
 that, artless, and without concealing,
 The storm is over,5 dawn is paling,
 as if beneath her, dark and rumbling,
 Chairs are pushed outward, loudly rumbling,
 her love obeys the laws of feeling,
 allows her hand, that's lost all feeling,
 hate, love, joy, sorrow - every feeling,

 Tatyana leaves Onegin kneeling,

 tribute of tears, applause's shrilling,
 now ten has struck, his wheels are rolling,
 Once more he counts the hour-bells tolling,
 Who's not disgusted by cajoling,
 it's easy, without too much fooling,
 to roar of banquets, din of brawling,
 lickspittles who adore their crawling,
 stirred at your gaze, so strange, so gleaming,
 one customary object gleaming,
 how proudly, how divinely gleaming,
 embodied by the power of dreaming,
 perpetually, one goal for dreaming,
 and everything around was dreaming,
 before a fire too slowly flaming,

 These figures from the world of seeming,

 started a life of pointless roaming,
 and duck get up; with instant timing,
 the regimental band is coming,
 as all things did, to bore him; homing,
 He could have spoken without harming,
 when, utterly worn out by rhyming,
 and, on my bed-head gently leaning,
 with love and comfort in your meaning,
 ``The morning star will soon be shining,
 and so, before the world of learning,
 into the fields, surveys the morning,
 pinker than glow of Northern morning,
 whisper of breeze announces morning,
 would settle, on the morrow morning,
 Risen with earliest rays of dawning,

 for which of them the tomb was yawning,

 as if she'd been profoundly sleeping,
 is softly, indolently sleeping,
 hunts cheeky flies, with swatter sweeping,
 Or, in your lonely homestead, moping,
 up your accounts, and raging, toping,
 ignores approval's friendly clapping,
 and where Thalia, gently napping,
 that's the refrain that you should sing,
 in all its mystery. Hymen's teasing,
 new guest is gradually progressing,
 admires the tumult and the pressing,
 Mushrooms in brine, for winter eating,
 we'll keep love's price appreciating,
 The house is packed out; scintillating,

 light as a shadow, shuns a meeting,

 that lady the hostess was greeting,
 there never fails a kindly greeting,
 Three whole hours, at the least accounting,
 the horse gets wind of them and, snorting,
 That point I wouldn't mind contesting,
 ``The elegy's just vain protesting,
 his spindly, shaggy nag. As fitting,
 while serious topics were disputing,
 Evgeny waits: and here comes driving,
 then, country evening fast arriving,
 The sky breathed autumn, time was flowing,
 once, with its foaming and its playing,
 And yet, although it's past conveying,
 to lift her skirt up; still she's flying,
 else, having found his pleasure cloying,

 secluded vales, where swans were crying,

 so sketchily possessed by each,
 the flickering tones of dress and speech,
 is it not true that Russian speech,
 so that all three went off to lunch,
 a dog with horns, a goatee'd witch,
 Who taught her all this mad, slapdash,
 of waiting for the dawn to blush,
 fieldwork directed from the path,
 fragments of poems from the North,
 fancies, my rhythmic search for truth,
 is agony, if I may speak,
 to pass for an affected freak,
 but when past joking he fell sick,
 Eugene has caught up, quick as quick,

 By dire presentiment awestruck,

 their guests, for all they ate and drank,
 where you were born as well, I think,
 at hours, which, why I cannot think,
 and bred upon the Neva's brink,
 parterres, she runs to rivulet's brink,
 the enjoyment of a friendly drink,
 with lively and pellucid look,
 sad meditations in her look,
 where flows a little glittering brook,
 for heart's delight, or fun, you took,

 over his neighbour's plain memorial,

 a mild rebuke was his worst mark,
 goodbye to you, my true ideal,
 But let's return to our essential,
 so heartless and so detrimental,
 she can't; Evgeny's pushed the portal,
 Still blazing with resentment's fuel,
 installed in me a different devil,
 on dance-floor, at breakup of ball,
 although it's nearly heard the knell,
 beauty with all its heavenly spell,
 and breeding ducks and geese as well,
 spectacled age divines as well,
 Farewell, familiar woods! Farewell,
 such stubborn brain, and vivid will,

 Often she halts against her will,

 Throughout their life, so calm, so peaceful,
 for them, in Butterweek5 the greaseful,
 a red-foot goose, weight something fearful,
 left quite alone with his own soul,
 a grizzled Calmuck stands to meet them,
 ``There, just in front of all that swarm,
 Semy&oacute;n Petr&oacute;vich, mean and glum,
 They should be forced to read in Russian,
 Books, riding, walks, sleep heavy-laden,
 A sledded coach, for years forsaken,
 Martin Zad&eacute;ka was the siren,
 In love with fame, by freedom smitten,
 a dwarf with tail, and a half-strain,
 No sleep, beneath that silken curtain,
 for, mistress-like, it's brilliant, vain,

 devoted to the Muse, or learning,

 the thirst for work, the lust for learning,
 you drink the magic draught of yearning,
 and where is love's tempestuous yearning,
 one day came down that lonely turning,
 no years of absence past returning,
 the level tenor of his going,
 ``You're ill, God have you in his keeping,
 on my untimely urn be weeping,
 Poor Lensky! Set aside for weeping,
 There too, he honoured, hotly weeping,
 the audience still is busy stamping,
 from off her charming shoulder's drooping,
 and though to do so would be daring,
 before you on the ground, unhearing,

 great bard despite his modest trapping,

 into the pan. Securely gripping,
 if, motionless, no life appearing,
 Petushk&oacute;v, local Paris, tearing,
 Elated by the music's blaring,
 scarlet with passion's instant flaring,
 Once more he turned to books, unchoosing,
 they kill the zest of rhymed composing,
 The years incline to gloom and prosing,
 or if himself, with rage arousing,
 reader, we must be separating,
 and thus our race, so fluctuating,
 then in the study's quiet setting,
 there's crashing, rumbling, pounding, trotting,
 as files, and scissors straight and curving,
 By now the shades of night are flying,

 Giving his pistol-butt a squeezing,

 or else does nature, fresh and staring,
 some nonsense thrown up while carousing,
 She's dressed since dawn, dead pale; debating,
 in you a tender pulse was beating,
 ``I noticed once, at our chance meeting,
 Zaretsky, engineer-in-waiting,
 untouched by envy's bitter smarting,
 he who has cooled down love with parting,
 the old dame wept her daughter's parting,
 she lowers darkened eyes, unwitting,
 the answer's past all human viewing,
 and band already tired of blowing,
 Day faded; on the table, glowing,
 No one will think that worth gainsaying,
 So went his sermon. Almost dying,

 Weltered in tears, and sorely smarting,

 flows and reverberates. Reciting,
 The banquet's given no cause for sneezing,
 to talk as if with heart unwrung,
 in my petition an approach,
 his humbly suppliant approach,
 now pay attention, I beseech,
 set the guests smiling at his arch,
 with foppery and too much starch,
 no vulgar epigram too much,

 there's no absurdity as such,
 along the Neva in a sleigh,

 were picking berries from the bough,
 with deep emotion through and through,
 Sbogar,8 mysterious through and through,
 and to Tanya, when he was through,
 the meaning of an epigraph,
 there's nothing can employ her anguish,
 Tatyana, hunted by love's anguish,
 Poor Tanya's bloom begins to languish,
 suddenly lowering eyes that languish,
 verdicts of vanity the bleak,
 none listens when the others speak,
 men's thoughts, their plots, the words they speak,
 avert his chest from pistol's click,
 but pantaloons, waistcoat, and frock,
 grow cold, and hard, and stiff as stock,

 behind the mill. In solemn talk,

 I move in the grand monde? that rank,
 Ladies of such a cast, I think,
 he sounds, in lyric frenzy sunk,
 terse words or crosses in the book,
 in father's or old uncle's book,
 And just here, in the window-nook,
 then Lensky moved his pawn, and took,
 coldness of wit; each note he took,
 blessed are daytime's care and cark,
 Tatyana, sleepless in the dark,
 over the modish word ideal,
 But he could draw a joking moral,
 and the majestic, antlered royal,
 while floors would split from crash of heel,

 with draughts from love's enticing flask,

 a novel, vague and superficial,
 or cunningly create a quarrel,
 No hope! no hope! He leaves the revel,
 Now, faced with this enormous revel,
 dear ladies' feet fly past like hail,
 lift up the gauzes of her veil,
 we'd better hasten to the ball,
 the threshold's thronged, wet-nurses call,
 moonscape, the half-light overall,

 wishes his madness to the devil,

 the art he'd studied best of all,
 ``Maidens, pretty maidens all,
 brigade of liveries in the hall,
 they all have swarmed into the hall,
 Lord Byron's portrait on the wall,
 whether from heaven or from hell,
 my friends, I need to pause a spell,
 this angel, this proud devil, tell,
 Onegin, drenched with sudden chill,
 without an elegiac frill,
 is he who's never felt its will,
 Public opinion - here's our idol,
 graduates of the Levshin1 school,
 past all the assembly in a whirl,

 Perhaps however, to be truthful,

 The years would pass; no longer youthful,
 wild as a forest deer, and fearful,
 Shy as a savage, silent, tearful,
 he's first to toast her in the bowl,
 impatiently on the mill-dam,
 some other, older spring will gleam,
 in midst of a poetic dream,
 another, a more chilling dream,
 dean of Chaldea's learned team,
 hereditary foes they seem,
 Zizi, my crystal and my gem,
 With womankind, the less we love them,
 how they remind me of your stem,
 at length, midst children swarming round him,
 At home she'll equably receive him,

 But she refuses to perceive him,

 dared clean his nails in front of him,
 cherries then we'll throw at him,
 a humble cross, in woodland gloom,
 a nightingale, in forest gloom,
 across the plain's enormous room,
 the easier they become to charm,
 epoch's portrayed, survived the ban,
 So a disabled soldier-man,
 for her improvement, a roman,
 The princess, sitting peaked and wan,
 without surprise or rage... his laden,
 and Werther, martyred and doom-laden,
 her look, so sweetly sorrow-laden,
 Here's tea: the girls have just, as bidden,

 use cunning silence as a screen,

 the flower-like pallor of the maiden,
 she sees it all. The simple maiden,
 return an answer, blunt or keen,
 and once forbidden fruit is seen,
 In passion's sluicing rain they freshen,
 ``Oh nurse, I'm sad, I'm sad, I'm shaken,
 the boring wives, the ill-bred men,
 by Baratynsky's3 wondrous pen,
 And foes he sees, long-since forgotten,
 to Eugene; nineteen to the dozen,
 are here untouched by fashion's reign,
 drives home - and plunging deeper in,
 When we draw a fellow in,
 was one who raged and raged again,
 plunged in reflection's deepest train,

 after two minutes, off again,

 advantages of heart and brain,
 Oh, this could all be false and vain,
 He deemed, in general, letters vain,
 a deathless murmur from within,
 surer than friendship or than kin,
 ``A humble sinner, Dimitry Larin,
 Buy&aacute;nov, my vivacious cousin,
 since, through the mist that dreams arise on,
 he saw no point in staying on,
 the roundest face that you've set eyes on,
 In duels a pedantic don,
 I'm yours, in a predestined fashion,
 they fluff her curls out in the fashion,
 Already, in exultant fashion,

 amid the deadening joys of fashion,

 no softball for the winds of fashion,
 sharing her in promiscuous fashion,
 of hope and gloom, romantic-fashion,
 How often, with her sweet communion,
 Fonvizin8 sparkled, freedom's champion,
 you acted well, that dread occasion,
 He reads to Olga on occasion,
 of moralistical persuasion,
 your icy look, your stern dissuasion,
 How dull are acting and evasion,
 thirty-two steps with great precision,
 which has recalled, without precision,
 Tatyana's haunted by her vision,
 At feasts, though, full of pert aggression,
 an idle monk in glum seclusion,

 her discomposure, her confusion,

 which, listening with some condescension,
 He got so used to this immersion,
 He gave this figure - loved with passion,
 facing a belle I loved with passion,
 But you, grand tomes I loathe with passion,
 he's viewed the boxes without passion,
 to sob out prayer, complaint, confession,
 Well, I must make a frank confession,
 As, lovingly, in his confession,
 I make magnanimous confession,
 Bard13 of The Feasts, and heart's depression,
 Pleasant, in spite of its compression,
 in Russian never found expression,
 before such candour of expression,

 the poet's heart found full expression,

 On these, with something like obsession,
 Rage died, and jealousy's obsession,
 pours out its guiltless frank admission,
 and plunged in tender shame's confusion,
 What else? Quite drunk with love's illusion,
 He followed them without illusion,
 lost them without regret's contusion,
 at verse, and hiss an imprecation,
 of Eugene, cold as all creation,
 the fleeting works of my creation,
 in indescribable elation,
 of philosophic isolation,
 so, full of heart-felt tribulation,
 come, trouble my imagination,
 then he'd implore a declaration,

 yet a capricious inclination,

 alone, and sunk in calculation,
 secure a secret assignation,
 and all our fresh imagination,
 I'll gladden your imagination,
 too long, against my inclination,
 Bards of our tearful generation,
 by writers of her admiration,
 when our sublimest aspiration,
 where dwelt this child of inspiration,
 Fired by the god of inspiration,
 field-work, and walks with inspiration,
 But come, thou youthful inspiration,
 Though belles had lost his adoration,
 Then gradually upon sensation,

 with a blunt cue for the duration,

 (I like a friendly conversation,
 no mannerism, no affectation,
 the strangeness of her habitation,
 trusted her without hesitation,
 where fate had fixed our confrontation,
 Of course. Yet fashion's wild rotation,
 before the window taking station,
 With mounts from home, or postal station,
 is where old master took up station,
 The invalid's glad salutation,
 on words of foreign derivation,
 I pray God grant his soul salvation,
 what kind of thought, what observation,
 I thank him without reservation,
 The nervous-tragical reaction,

 by what's called machinal reaction,

 A pause of silence and inaction,
 He gave his arm. In sad abstraction,
 Lensky all evening, in distraction,
 I feel a brotherly affection,
 on Eugene's lips. In his dejection,
 the man of reverie and reflection,
 what holds her in profound reflection,
 in simple but sublime reflection,
 almanacs, journals of reflection,
 Lending his tone a grave inflection,
 what held me was my predilection,
 He found them in some old collection,
 then on the leaves of recollection,
 you sought - tumultuous recollection,

 but looks and talk took the direction,

 I trust my fate to your direction,
 Reader, whatever fate's direction,
 to undertake their resurrection,
 giving the lady their protection,
 in dreams and cards and their prediction,
 untouched by trace of inhibition,
 I've learnt the voice of new ambition,
 a joker in the old tradition,
 the guardian angel of tradition,
 a modish second-hand edition,
 the modesty of her condition,
 Tatyana, hiding her condition,
 Perhaps to improve the world's condition,
 those words where love, without condition,
 At this midnight of my condition,

 With spelling scrambled to perdition,

 His unexpected apparition,
 what is he? Just an apparition,
 was it not you, dear apparition,
 methodical by disposition,
 the first will never find fruition,
 it's late, time's passing... not to mention,
 She's paid the sunrise no attention,
 Now, she devours, with what attention,
 devoured a book with rapt attention,
 he'll charm you with his fine invention,
 Deaf to her sister's intervention,
 your tears would flow - but your emotion,
 What sort of roses, in your notion,
 Eugene forsakes the packed reception,

 By dreams now sad in their conception,

 at first Madame gave him tuition,
 She went - and Eugene, all emotion,
 he almost begs for absolution,
 he looks, in sweet irresolution,
 that rogue, backbiter, pantaloon,
 a rogue, a slanderer, a poltroon,
 young traitresses by the platoon,
 by Scott, by Seneca, or Byron,
 Each day, despite the appeals of reason,
 imagination, with such reason,
 Like modish rhymes that lack all reason,
 so, seeing there no rhyme or reason,
 He's neither died, nor lost his reason,
 no meaning in or out of season,
 By contrast, in the frozen season,

 a free romance's far horizon,

 my disillusioned glass, and yearn,
 something to fritter and to burn,
 products of carefree hours, of fun,
 for friends of languor, or of fun,
 last night he'd erred in making fun,
 one sees a duck and aims his gun,
 and soon his travels had begun,
 and paler than the moon at dawn,
 for Olga, on the spreading lawn,
 her little friends, Tatyana'd yawn,
 onset of the incipient yawn,
 her head in modesty cast down,
 the shepherd, as he used to do,
 ``I think I'm happy.'' Time to go,

 and lovelorn maiden whom he'd known,

 and at the altar, with a crown,
 still meek, still deaf as howd'youdo,
 where did that glum eccentric go,
 glitter and tumble as they go,
 a soul that perished long ago,
 of language which, so long ago,
 in Lyc&eacute;e gardens long ago,
 or pine, persuade of yes or no,
 and how's Tatyana? Olga too,
 Onegin sits at table too,
 and introduced, for the last lap,
 the floor serves Triquet for his nap,
 mountains will part; below the deep,
 Only Tatyana does not sleep,
 across each bush, across each steep,

 henceforth in front of you I weep,

 taken the saucers in their grip,
 song, laughter, whistle, bark and champ,
 a plain, unceremonious troop,
 from thirty down to two; and stop,
 he arrives - the cork goes flying up,
 recall, by its bewitching cup,
 the joys of youth, that festal cup,
 neighbours and friends in kindly group,
 Tatyana seeks to attune her ear,
 sweet as a lover's kiss, and dear,
 unseen, already you were dear,
 Those friends, those friends! it is, I fear,
 by waters that were still and clear,
 my soul had heard your voice ring clear,

 as gay as morning and as clear,

 when we see him from afar,
 complete with broad-brimmed bolivar,
 ``Here, near Saint Simeon; in December,
 Whether the arrow has my number,
 Back to his regiment the Lancer,
 Don't let a ghost be your bear-leader,
 in my long task, be my upholder,
 in winter, on the cast-iron fender,
 Who taught her an address so tender,
 My love for it is just as tender,
 that huge ballrooms vibrated under,
 the whole thieves' kitchen flies asunder,
 ladies at the fireside confer,
 who walks with sorrow, and with danger,
 roamed the still forest like a ranger,

 by fate's decree: this freakish stranger,

 then know that your reproving finger,
 in pairs, their hunger driving stronger,
 ``this is the one!'' Ah, ever stronger,
 what's more, I loved you; but my hunger,
 ``For then, Onegin, I was younger,
 But where, mid tragic storms that rend her,
 bound where the magic bow will send her,
 her heartache, did it long compel her,
 To my astonishment I've seen her,
 all day, all night, his presence fills her,
 Ladies came over, crossed to meet her,
 the doorway opened wide to meet her,
 At once Anisia came to greet her,
 hoar-frost and sun in freezing weather,

 a joking flirt, or both together,

 And not because she'd read him, either,
 I would have found a friend, another,
 for God's sake, that will do. But, brother,
 long since, like brother linked to brother,
 and health, life's sweetness and its shimmer,
 who in the country spends her summer,
 He cursed Theocritus and Homer,
 and the young city-bred newcomer,
 Gvozd&iacute;n, exemplary farmer,
 into the mud, a drunken goner,
 unswerving friend, correct landowner,
 Give me a pen and give me paper,
 she never read a Russian paper,
 of secrets, like a friend but dearer,
 of Neva's proud imperial water,

 I'll sprinkle you with holy water,

 Here with his wife, that bulging charmer,
 but just to make the bargain keener,
 What do I want? what am I after,
 Evgeny, full of inward laughter,
 like a drunk traveller in a shelter,
 between two aunts, in pillared shelter,
 panes patterned by the finest printer,
 pale transcript of a vivid master,
 Longtime inside this modish cloister,
 It's late. A breeze begins to roister,
 there was a general furtive chatter,
 No, incorrect and careless chatter,
 The world of fashion, prone to flatter,
 Who could have looked the poet better,

 evoke emotion's pitter-patter,

 but brighter than the heavenly litter,
 The night has many stars that glitter,
 she found Evgeny, eyes a-glitter,
 Time was, he'd been the wittiest ever,
 so gloriously he'd fool the clever,
 led to the princess, all a-shiver,
 And someone's heart will feel a quiver,
 There sings the nightingale, spring's lover,
 not separation's chilling power,
 Lensky at home awaits the answer,
 he's at the club, a real stayer,
 her heart had spoken, free as air,
 the girl's pale charms, her loosened hair,
 a deft arrangement to his hair,
 To me, unsmiling lips bring terror,

 or, after some dull dinner's labour,

 Then with a half-ethereal splendour,
 whispers some ballad of the hour,
 my inept pupil, at that hour,
 like Regulus, that god of honour,
 her Russian was as thin as vapour,
 insists, when the mazurka ends,
 dear companions, darling friends,
 I prize the attention of my friends,
 Lord Byron, with his shrewd caprices,
 to all the most adored actrices,
 with bended knees a windmill dances,
 till Moscow, meekly on its knees,
 the prejudices of the ages,
 with broods of children of all ages,

 as Sadi17 sang in earlier ages,

 Fare thee well, and if for ever,
 that fell, and then began to shiver,
 not once a day a thought will quiver,
 Killed!... At this frightful word a-quiver,
 they shove each plate, and every chair,
 Don Juan's and the Giaour's creator,
 Olinka yawned, just like her neighbour,
 ``Let's go.'' The friends, all haste and vigour,
 in sledded coaches and coup&eacute;s,
 a fop, a punter on the cards,
 From early on she loved romances,
 (vain twaddle, fables of the ages,
 and feather-beds, and birds in cages,
 and the Skot&iacute;nins, grizzled sages,
 for whom, to expiate your crimes,

 you've made so many secret rhymes,

 a blessing from its blasts and rages,
 There's din of parting now that rages,
 Priam-like agricultural sages,
 a rest from toil and all its aches,
 upon her lips the breathing dies,
 and other, more exacting worries,
 resigned himself to prison's ties,
 Of course, the love of tender beauties,
 that generations of new beauties,
 or just grammatical mistakes,
 the eyes of all, the hooves, the snozzles,
 to comfort her in all her woes,
 The crush, the heat, as music blares,
 and jam in jars, and household wares,

 will loyally discharge its duties,

 parks, monasteries, towers and ledges,
 peasants, and fashion-shops, and sledges,
 across the drift-encumbered acres,
 and force that purity inspires,
 calm men with beatific features,
 It's time: kind-hearted, idle creatures,
 Melmoth,7 whose roaming never ceases,
 twirls the other slowly as she pleases,
 but then a sudden breeze surprises,
 frightening with all despair's disguises,
 inside a pocket Triquet nurses,
 the inevitable silly asses,
 Here, in his red peruke and glasses,
 High rank, of course, and fashion's glasses,
 Each others' and their own successes,

 the beauties in their flimsy dresses,

 the swarm, the glittering mob that presses,
 the skyblue eyes, the flaxen tresses,
 round Tanya congregate the misses,
 Along the fronts of darkened houses,
 Some days he's still in bed, and drowses,
 along the street where slumber drowses,
 critics and their capricious vogues,
 among the maidens and the wives,
 I find no sense; the truth is this,
 Bokharans, orchards, merchants, shacks,
 boulevards, chemists, and Cossacks,
 haphazard; so, to God be thanks,
 nonsense will earn indulgent looks,
 And so they lived, two ageing mortals,

 and hetman of the gambling-halls,

 into the tomb's wide open portals,
 the country cottages and hovels,
 the tusks, the corpse's finger-nails,
 the bleeding tongues, the tufted tails,
 boys, country women, stately halls,
 Street lamps go flashing by, and stalls,
 so brilliantly he'd hoax the fools,
 and life celestial's phantom gleams,
 Russia's old glories and their gleams,
 He was the slave of a tenacious,
 and though my muse may be capricious,
 (an attribute that's quite vexatious,
 one leads the multitude in thought,
 when hourly we ourselves betrayed it,
 Alas, our youth was what we made it,

 a nation's wealth is, what augments it,

 your soul displays, in holy dreams,
 empty the purpose it proclaims,
 of reason's icy intimations,
 of sleeplessness, faint inspirations,

 that lives, and glitters, and endears,
 am I estranged, does all that cheers,
 no proud pretentions to success,
 gazes at him... and nonetheless,
 the crush, the glitter and the gladness,
 no haughty stare around the press,
 she spins and, friend of winter nights,
 its glaring feasts, and shrill events,
 by dull eternity's purlieus,
 However has he earned so vicious,
 your heroes, raging and ferocious,
 your battles, lawless and atrocious,
 its newness with our faded days,
 fire of the cutlets' scalding fat,
 prince, who in that dark-red b&eacute;ret,
 with visions of enchanted night,
 Then, crying, they untwined my plait,

 O, never know these frightful dreams,
 in dream toward the woods and plains,
 In days of carefree aspirations,
 its pristine charm: heeltaps, and leaps,
 beds, bridges, lawn, she never stops,
 threats, vows, and simulated fears,
 by six-page letters, rings and tears,
 lorgnettes of jealous fashion-leaders,
 to happen long ago, dear readers,
 the morning light no longer lingers,

 Legends, and mystical traditions,
 rumours and threats and premonitions,
 a raging torrent, capped with breakers,
 Then doors are opened, Lensky enters,
 pans, mattresses, and trunks, and chairs,
 flicker of swiftly twirling pairs,
 a fashion-plate for illustrators,
 another of the ball-dictators,
 he rested - wept for by his neighbours,
 still dim, through crystal's magic glass,
 he'll spend before the looking-glass,
 and from the salon the princess,
 a shadow, null and meaningless,
 These days I'm finding even gladness,
 the atmosphere of youth and madness,
 Yes, youth divines, in giddy madness,

 Full of obedience and demureness,
 poetic in her simple pureness,
 Nursed in the orient's languid weakness,
 stalking the momentary weakness,
 There, with epigrammatic neatness,
 against the tea's excessive sweetness,
 a Muscovite in Harold's dress,
 Eugene's a pedant in his dress,
 an elegy to her address,
 to play with a dishevelled tress,
 tracked him, and put him in duress,
 Strike the ditty up, my sweets,
 But when a later age has found us,
 as when chill autumn rains surround us,
 even in novels, vice entraps us,
 Today a mental fog enwraps us,
 Yet hissing froth deals a malicious,
 too weak to change, I'm staying vicious,

 and act the humble or imperious,
 And my companion, so mysterious,
 eyes rolling, arms uplifted, furious,
 attract the sneering of the jealous,
 as fate's mysterious purpose burrows,
 ``No, every minute of my days,
 The comrade of so many days,
 But he, by sad and rocky ways,
 for dance, and din, and worldly ways,
 oblivion of life's stormy ways,
 thank you for suffering and its joys,
 it held me captive; tit for tat,

 in the salon new faces meet,
 is it that she, poor simple sweet,
 or of Ist&oacute;mina, my sweet,
 and enviable for a poet,
 youth which has nothing to regret,

 and watch your daughters closer yet,

 From widow Clicquot and from Mo&euml;t,
 who on a deuce, that famous cheat,
 no magic fancies of the poet,
 get two young friends to pick a fight,
 he drives there like a bird in flight,
 solitude, stillness and the night,
 in the deep stillness of the night,
 in fashion's din, at still of night,
 have been a fool; yet he'd a right,
 saw through the window, morning-bright,
 may chorus, when she comes in sight,
 You too, mamas, I pray attend it,
 there's a small window shining in it,
 Tatyana3 was her name... I own it,

 the safest place for declarations,

 No secret crimes, and no perditions,
 passion's rough language talked by others,
 retired, forgotten by his brothers,
 I've seen how, trustful in his blindness,
 for planting cabbage, like Horatius,
 and on her cheeks the fever stays,
 yes, these were our forefathers' ways,
 Already borne down by regret,
 her nerves, she leant on it her weight,
 in the mazurka he was light,
 once more, at that beloved sight,
 but it's the first time you'll have known it,
 The book displayed, not so you'd know it,
 flown from society as we know it,
 In this, dear reader, if you know it,

 of fallen glory. Well! don't wait,

 choruses, Tanya can but wait,
 with trees decked in their silvery kit,
 and jolly magpies on the flit,
 and good and ill, and learning's fruit,
 in his first dream of passion's fruit,
 on state affairs; there was a wit,
 darkly above the water's lilt,
 What of it? it's euphonious, pleasant,
 before first light they have appointment,
 Heedless of the proud world's enjoyment,
 its work, its torture, its enjoyment,
 his young heyday's supreme employment,
 and yet inseparably present,
 remains unmoved: still he's persistent,

 there, where the coulisse entrance went,

 poor girl, to drop into a faint,
 but will, and reason's strong constraint,
 of social buzz and modish riot,
 and, curious now about the lot,
 without a trace of spite or plot,
 by decent company, has not,
 I'll save this blossom on the shoot,
 and fastens, like a term of art,
 fly to my corner like a dart,
 they shared their days in deed and heart,
 with bursts of passion from the heart,
 as if a cold hand squeezed her heart,
 one thing inspired his breath, his heart,
 Evgeny loved him from his heart,
 by my Eugene, not for his heart,

 in the far backwoods' deepest heart,

 liven the drowsing of my heart,
 your grief would fail to touch my heart,
 that Lensky and Eugene, apart,
 of jealousy has made her start,
 and to it, with a grave import,
 one finds in war amusing sport,
 dreams of inconsequential cast,
 she sits with head sunk on her breast,
 another's joy, another's breast,
 the hostess cries and, moving fast,
 drawn from a dim, warm-hearted past,
 whether it goes careering past,
 amusing, flattering with the best,
 startling the ingenuous with a jest,

 the year, his age, then: ``may your rest,

 I put your genius to the test,
 down from the porch, light as the lightest,
 even by Ladies' Fashion Post,
 of her own horses, not the post,
 to pine away from passion's thirst,
 by will of Zeus, the high and just,
 Alas! the generations must,
 With that, in tears, and quite worn out,
 have pushed their frontiers further out,
 flits Olga: ``now, tell me straight out,
 his dreams, while she whom they're about,
 at forty he'd have got the gout,
 throw meadows into muddy rout,
 drunk, eaten, yawned, grown weak and stout,
 now disenchanted with the next,

 more and more bored by yearning's text,

 devouring Gibbon and Rousseau,
 But now - oh God! - the thought of you,
 and counsellor (retired) Fly&aacute;nov,
 and look, my cousin's come, Buy&aacute;nov,
 and, still transparent to the view,
 Guillot, behind a stump in view,
 the pages of some dull review,
 as by the shortest way they flew,
 of pity: in his silent bow,
 and empty gossip, you'll allow,
 to see you, faithfully to follow,
 I only write like this, you know,
 only in January the snow,
 bear, blackness, blizzard, bridge and crow,

 I've run a mile, I must avow,

 without a goal on which to fix,
 of that old duellistic fox,
 beyond a string of dull tableaux,
 I'd love you, but inside a day,
 and then, indoors the livelong day,
 Then, plunged in the housekeeper's day,
 the giddiest hope, carefree and gay,
 alarmed by my melodious lay,
 to see life as a ritual play,
 Tatyana's love is no by-play,
 (in the romantic style, we say,
 forgotten features. ``Can you say,
 to reasoned talk, no dull hearsay,
 to the empty homestead made her way,
 though we... don't shine in any way,

 past ice-blocks, blue and squared away,

 would say goodbye and drive away,
 sequence of dinners stretch away,
 darlings, then we'll run away,
 pretty maidens, romp away,
 stiffening as the hours go by,
 We each enjoy a special hobby,
 are almost bursting; she's quite ready,
 but now, thank God, you're well and steady,
 of children, though as young as they,
 the cold perfection of the sky,
 to boom, to flash across the sky,
 girls as they passed her spoke less loudly,
 Today... the sad memorial's lonely,
 is the supreme reward. Precisely,
 By now the sun is climbing steeply,
 All Lensky's thoughts went hurly-burly,
 to dreaming given up unduly,
 is represented rather truly,
 bright summer days that passed so slowly,

 reluctant to exhaust the boy,

 on features known, but to that dreary,
 bored with hilarity, and weary,
 Your horse, blunt-shoed and all unwary,
 all egoistical and dry,
 How long he'd been here, was her query,
 before him roast beef, red and gory,
 I meant to paint, with Alban's8 glory,
 fortune, and dignity, and glory,
 ``as sung of old, in years of glory,
 and p&acirc;t&eacute;, Strasbourg's deathless glory,
 this modish whirl, this social story,
 to high renown my doleful story,
 with gown and slippers; tearing hurry,
 where, in a cab, and furious hurry,

 But, did they not corrupt society,

 But then, oblivious of the city,
 in far Moldavia, fit for pity,
 the guests are feasted, good and hearty,
 I've known too many a haughty beauty,
 inexorably wed to duty,
 who early died as die the brave'' --
 such rustic cunning can't be wrong!) --
 in a peaked cap, all dust and fluff, --
 you'll recognize him soon enough, --
 of Russian verse, its force in action, --
 to her flower-garden, to her novels, --
 and all the works of Fontanelle16 --
 Clarissa, Julie, or Delphine6 --
 in first place - listen, am I right? --
 military-foppish, diplomatic --

 the man she feared and idolized --

 the darling objects - don't you know it? --
 They buzz - but then all talk's suspended --
 and Lensky, left eye closing, aimed --
 her feelings were far more inclined --
 sweet words by which her pain was banned --
 had with its brilliant mantle crowned --
 with whom your thoughts are so obsessed --
 while, marmot-like, he hibernated --
 expecting winter, nature waited --
 Reader, I wish that, as we parted --
 beyond the grave we all must build --
 your cold discourse, were less unkind --
 the tolerant Evgeny heard --
 she can't escape at any pace --
 coquettishness has got no trace --

 Can it be true, it won't come twice --
 to life and hope with just a glance --

 no boy, to fight or take offence --

 on points that all long since agree --
 but I've become another's wife --
 Faublas'3 disciple for an age --
 with the grand general in her wake --
 She sits with Nina8 at a table --
 for hours, with elbows on the table --
 a vivid brush, a witty rattle --
 Onegin - now once more my theme --
 Parisian taste invents for one --
 the bear explains: ``my cousin's here --
 who sets me snoring then and there --
 Saint Petersburg's fine flower was there --
 the season which is such a bore --
 Of Lensky's fate they said no more --
 it's my profession; he was wearing --

 my house, my evenings, all that state --

 that I'm just longing to indite --
 a lyre, and on it perched, a dove --
 revive it with another shove --
 has wished it an abrupt goodbye --
 daren't look behind her; fairly dashing --
 sets a sonorous cadence rolling --
 I must translate - there's no presuming --
 Only from Tanya's heart, no cheering --
 a calculation past despising --
 The north wind blows, the clouds are driving --
 his dull, sick look, his dumb reproach --
 he turns away: ``I've had enough --
 Vesper is met by crow of cock --
 By now the sledge is at the portal --

 the subtle spouse was just as loyal --

 allows no comfort to come through --
 drank in your words when all was still --
 into the cups its darkling stream --
 he really forced one to admire him --
 Herder, and even at times a Russian --
 were chanted, I remember when --
 what odes Vladimir might have written --
 about them - nineteen to the dozen --
 wronged always in disgraceful fashion --
 if I had power to choose your fashion --
 three carts - traditional procession --
 in casual letters of confession --
 ripen, and find a new expression --
 nothing was barred beyond discussion --
 Seeing herself as a creation --

 Amidst the hills, down in that valley,

 and read my Apuleius keenly,
 go off to sleep quite hale and hearty,
 devote to whist an evening party,
 a lady - what a grim discussion! --
 the eager players are enrolled --
 and whist, that's now so keenly f&ecirc;ted --
 the headpiece-text is thus indited --
 reader, you ask, and I'll expound --
 tranquillity, and solitude --
 his gaze at Tatyana alone --
 each news of her he'd been imbibing --
 is calling us, for ever calling --
 the child prepares for protocol --
 reduced to sense, not without pain --

 and held him briefly in their sway,

 across green meadows, dilly-dally,
 and taken by the French - some prize! --
 dogged by one feeling, only one --
 the gallery claps - it's bored with waiting --
 declares itself in ways unwitting --
 that corps of social legislation --
 She struck one as the incarnation --
 craving your tolerance in season --
 don't judge the race before it's run --
 would talk, keep silent, laugh, then frown --
 Enough, I tell you, that will do --
 let evening pass, tomorrow too --
 paled, flushed, or lost composure's grip --
 but your vile Helen's not my star --
 perhaps - for flattering hope will linger --

 it's like a vanishing newcomer --

 on Finland's coast a lonely rover --
 simple old lady; but the liquor --
 But the swift summer-time proceeds --
 could have been turned to worthier ends --
 for the bleak tongue of boorish clods --
 sensitive ladies of all ages --
 the horns, and the moustachio'd nozzles --
 Ah, gently, gently, easy goes --
 you took an honourable part --
 in your cal&egrave;che of foreign cast --
 if her cross mood was at its worst --
 Tatyana struggles to run out --
 she flails around, she tries to shout --
 that one be shot just anyhow --

 that languid beauty, listens nicely --

 in Olga everything expresses --
 How well he donned new shapes and sizes --
 the ring of marriageable girls --
 the legatee of his relations --
 Such were a young rake's meditations --
 throughout the boredom of the hours --
 or for the modishly luxurious --
 till now our language - proud, God knows --
 and ruled him like an autocrat --
 rigorously though you'd inspect --
 and yet in her you'd not detect --
 she looks, the room is getting light --
 their hopes, their pranks, their dreams at night --
 that Menelaus was quite right --
 the homely scene, take pleasure in it --

 Their look, though, shows no change upon it --

 my tongue kept drawing from the heart --
 how well he knew the way to hurt --
 smile, voice and movements, little waist --
 spared her the expense she dreaded most --
 --------
 --------
 --------
 --------
 --------
 --------
 ``some are far distant, some are dead''.
 1 Pushkin first wrote ``imperial portraits''; but this he later altered ``for reasons of censorship'' because, as Nabokov explains, ``tsars were not to be mentioned in so offhand a way''.
 8 Francesco Albani, Italian painter (1578-1660).
 Acknowledgements are due to Messrs. Routledge and Kegan Paul for permission to quote from Vladimir Nabokov's notes in volumes 2 and 3 of his edition of Eugene Onegin (London, 1964. Revised edition, 1976).

 across the stage; he yawns: ``Ballet --

 he looks, and sees the hour of day --
 and she, submissively, inertly --
 --------
 --------
 --------
 --------
 --------
 though some support it with good grace).
 (for which he must receive due praise).
 fail to perceive - that's by the way).
 regard, and slipped away for good, ...
 conclude that it's high time she wed!...
 she fell in love - the hour was fated...
 I'm terrified - so let it be...
 lively, capricious, and inane...

 others will follow where they tread...

 ... ...
 ... ...
 ... ...
 &lt; ...
 for vanity, and din, and glare!...
 before such playfulness of soul!...
 to a soir&eacute;e. ``My God! to her!...
 and look serenely on your beauty!...
 and in it boldly I'm confiding''...
 it had its epigram-potential7...
 the earth for him grew dumb and closed?...
 he consecrated to my keeping?...
 then sudden fear attacked Tatyana...
 Lensky, that tragic victim, died...

 suggests a victim richly decked...

 for hours alone; she walked and walked...
 A sudden clatter!... blood was curdled...
 but just then Eugene's pistol flamed...
 A thought was born, and quickly noted...
 of house-familiars stands dismayed...
 you know I'm hard to comprehend...
 How could she? why, he'd never heard...
 with puzzled and confused regard...
 ``I close. I dread to read this page...
 moment the assembly seemed to shake...
 He goes inside, corpse-like of feature...
 Tanya pursued them with her gaze...
 for shame and fear my wits are sliding...
 is sad old moon's... Hark! snow is creaking...
 a scream rings out... the cabin's quaking...

 a riding whip. Tanya keeps walking...

 with lines to mark where they were sleeping...
 Tatyana's husband, now appearing...
 and entered. Ballroom overflowing...
 you won't find that quite so much catch...
 won't even cross their minds by stealth...
 in morning time he'd read a book...
 to face him now I feel too frail...
 already silvering all the plain...
 to Evgeny. Oh, God, she'd never...
 I'm wandering in a world of dreams...
 quickly to O... I mean to that...
 I'm good for nothing now, my sweet...
 Tanya comes to in utter fright...
 and leave no faint footprint of glory...

 7 Melmoth the Wanderer, by C. R. Mathurin, 1820.

 has left, and no one here has met her...
 Young ladies jump for future blisses...
 opens the door a tiny slot...
 through distant regions of the heart...
 5 Lover of Val&eacute;rie, by Madame de Krudener, 1803.
 3 See Chapter Three, note 13.
 4 Refers to Pushkin's poem The Demon, of 1823.
 2 Lenore, romantic ballad by Gottfried August B&uuml;rger, 1773.
 6 Delphine, by Madame de Sta&euml;l, 1805.
 4 Hero of Mathilde, by Sophie Cottin, 1805.
 8 Jean Sbogar, by Charles Nodier, 1818.
 11 Count Emmanuel Sen-Pri (1806-1828) had a reputation as a cartoonist. He was the son of the Comte de Saint-Priest, a French &eacute;migr&eacute;.
 Penguin Books, 625 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10022, U.S.A.
 1 ``See First Snow, a poem by Prince Vyazemsky.'' Pushkin's note. For Prince P. Vyazemsky (1791--1878), poet, critic and close friend of Pushkin, see also Chapter Seven, XLIX.
 slumber still floats above his head.

 whatever you may need, just call...

 he's happy, yes, he's almost well...
 of a delicious, guiltless dream...
 you see the two in uniform...
 ``So to strange kinsfolk I was taken...
 tread the calm, settled path they've chosen...
 no artifices of the vain...
 ``Now don't suppose... let no suspicion...
 the books then underwent inspection...
 Dogs, howling, rushed in her direction...
 her husband's or the world's attention...
 ``Oh nyanya, nyanya, I don't question...
 yet floods of talk around the town...
 ``Just half a glass more... that will do...
 a novel in Lafontaine's8 manner...

 Decreed in highest court for ever...

 each coldly plans the other's slaughter...
 just look, and never mind the chatter...
 ``You're married? No idea whatever...
 with an obeisance I'll hand over...
 I'd nothing to attract your humour...
 with her own forests and her meads...
 noise in her ears, glare in her eyes...
 sleep runs from her, she turns and turns...
 then dress...
 of sudden brightness... it's too curious...
 that somehow that same day we'll meet...
 not only pain, too much to meet...
 demanded. ``Yes, she looks... And yet...
 of distant countries, of moonlight...
 a glossary of smart argot...

 she roams the empty garden-plot...

 Oh, I've no strength... I'm tired, my chest...
 let's go together, take a rest...
 and evening now drew on in mist...
 a soul that nothing can renew...
 Ah, all that my Onegin knew...
 that wicked, loose-tongue chatterbox...
 ``It's nothing, nurse, nothing, I say...
 3 Julie, ou la nouvelle H&eacute;loise. by Rousseau, 1761.
 16 Author of Dialogues des Morts, 1683.
 5 Hero of Griboedov's Woe from Wit, 1824.
 12 Author of Maximes et Pens&eacute;es, Paris, 1796.
 14 Author of De la sant&eacute; des gens de lettres, Lausanne and Lyon, 1768.
 7 Fortress captured from the Turks in 1788.
 13 Author of Recherches physiologiques sur la vie et la mort, Paris, 1799.

 it was goodbye, Monsieur l'Abb&eacute;.

 and, with my Eugene, so have I.
 6 Stanza discarded by Pushkin, also stanza XXXVIII.
 C. H. J.
 and slowly day begins to climb.
 the nightly luminaries climb.
 presses its forebears to the tomb.
 stands over my poor nurse's tomb.
 goes out of us when youth is dead.
 Where to, God knows. The trail is dead.
 and silently he hung his head.
 and kept quite silent while she read.
 for Tanya, winter's ways are dread.
 vanishes with his load of dread.
 which with a blush he leaves unread.
 just like, on turf, your fleeting tread.

 he's put belle Tatiana instead.

 on Richardson gone raving mad.
 you're really going? Well, I'm sad.
 and doctors, he'd have died in bed.
 Tanya's undressed, and lies in bed.
 ``OE'' devotedly inlaced.
 a stanza villainously padded.
 ``why, Olga's younger, and she's bedded.
 always comes back: I'll not be wedded.
 I'm sick, my dear, I'm sick indeed.
 is brought to table at full speed.
 begot by boredom out of greed.
 and where he'd silently agreed.
 unloved, and friendless, and estranged.
 1 Gavrila Derzh&aacute;vin (1745-1816), ``Russia's first outstanding poet'' (Nabokov). While still at the Lyceum in Tsarskoe Selo, in 1815, Pushkin read some of his verses to him. The stanza was unfinished.

 9 Court decoration given to the Empress's ladies-in-waiting. Stanza unfinished.

 to talk to her, but language died.
 with a consumption, they've relied.
 ``Who? that fat general?'' Tanya cried.
 with a first click, the catch is tried.
 the bear - what next? - behind her stalked.
 monsters the maiden stood revealed.
 The lady of the house has fled.
 beneath it, vapour wreathed and coiled.
 foes, friends and loves, their voice is stilled.
 he found all kinds of brickbat hurled.
 her bow, as calm and as restrained.
 has something low and unrefined.
 was that calm brow of one who swooned.
 then to the altar, to be crowned.
 and where most surely notes are sped.

 a treasure never to be shared.

 at any time he'd be prepared.
 in these last years all mixed and fluttered.
 far, far from Italy, his adored.
 in quiet flood. A beetle whirred.
 no sound by which her soul is stirred.
 with neighbour Lensky, the deceased.
 in warmer airs was half dispersed.
 where folded arms are tightly pressed.
 was by forebodings much oppressed.
 his bow was wholly unaffected.
 that visitors must be expected.
 above a stream the moon had lighted.
 she grew accustomed, and contented.
 sadly he mourned for the departed.

 to the hero that she'd adopted.

 a foe - our mood should be warm-hearted.
 the carriage of the newly-wed.
 and put a cross-sign on the maid.
 nor his,2 who sings of Finland's maid.
 was the first thing that Olga said.
 two verses of the Aeneid.
 from her Monsieur took on the child.
 He was sweet-natured, and yet wild.
 with fire from every cross of gold.
 and now at last he saw the World.
 they praise the Father of the world.
 I leave the verdict in your hand.
 or letters in a young girl's hand.
 each grips his pistol in his hand.
 in untold beauty close at hand.

 and took a mortgage on his land.

 of ruts that grace our fatherland.
 you see your fated tempter stand.
 Goodbye, for now we make an end.
 by nature, contradiction's friend.
 He's here - Monsieur Guillot, my friend.
 and useful goods of every kind.
 custom is despot of mankind.
 in deep anxiety of mind.
 caricatured them in his mind.
 was quite beyond his wit, we found.
 with thoughts of him in ceaseless round.
 the programme of his daily round.
 and glittering whiteness all around.
 let fall his pistol on the ground.

 he's left sad footprints on the ground.

 perplexed... and rooted to the ground.
 more tender than it used to sound.
 hymns of the ages never sound.
 the blood came smoking from the wound.
 with Eugene frozen where he stood.
 if I, like you, had been a bard.
 came out so soft, it scarce was heard.
 and tears were drowning her regard.
 as at a censure that was hard.
 She entered the deserted yard.
 he's racing millward like a bird.
 he sends, a second, then a third.
 but scarcely understood a word.
 to Eugene's letter, word for word.
 all that today we find absurd.

 as much as in Moscow the proud.

 my giddy mistress made me proud.
 and brains, and an attractive face.
 the grand monde finds it out of place.
 still after many years in place.
 others prescribe a watering-place.
 they sit, they cross themselves for grace.
 that, though polite, was clear as ice.
 to know the audience hears his voice.
 to Moscow settled in a trice.
 to the circle of our dance.
 Few foreign masterpieces can have suffered more than Eugene Onegin from the English translator's failure to convey anything more than - at best - the literal meaning. It is as if a sound-proof wall separated Pushkin's poetic novel from the English-reading world. There is a whole magic which goes by default: the touching lyrical beauty, the cynical wit of the poem; the psychological insight, the devious narrative skill, the thrilling, compulsive grip of the novel; the tremendous gusto and swing and panache of the whole performance.
 it brought back Tanya from her trance.
 a stall, a kitchen and a fence.
 her progress at the masquerade.

 by flickering past us like a fence.

 the inmost thoughts that girls can hide.
 and felt himself love's invalide.
 by two small oaktrees in a ride.
 for honour, a straightforward pride.
 as did the general at her side.
 sits imperturbable, and free.
 my tedious taste for feeling free.
 5 Girl in Zhukovsky's poem who practises divination, with frightening results. See note 2 to Chapter Three.
 to drain, on credit, bottles three.
 yet dared not trust what I could see.
 had nothing to employ his life.
 far more than most who leave this life.
 8 August Lafontaine (1758-1851), German novelist of family life.
 the war, the snowfall, and his wife.
 and with his dinner, and his wife.

 I was just thirteen years of age.

 shortened, or lengthened off the page.
 or novelties from fashion's page.
 adorned the sanctum of our sage.
 All who behold him find him strange.
 but then she found their choice was strange.
 nothing more lovable than he.
 ours was no Grandison - not he.
 for Satan, love's a splendid joke.
 a block of snow will slip and tumble.
 and wasted life's fine flower meanwhile.
 for happiness - that alien role.
 was far from happy with his role.
 2 Heroine of Zhukovsky's poem of the same name.
 straightened his wig, and asked her name.

 of far-away Onegin's name.

 and for a chuckle or a smile.
 Nasce una gente a cui 'l morir non dole.
 of love so timorous and gentle.
 his Sunday game of cards with me.
 Tatyana's rites are not for me.
 The fields are dark, since evening came.
 and stately periwigs, their fame.
 to do them all is easy game.
 all modish foes dread worldly shame.
 a novel graced with such a name.
 rings proudly in that sombre name.
 like a true friend, to speak my name.
 new depths of boredom.'' ``No, the same.
 a brook flows through a grove of lime.
 in twilight of all&eacute;es of lime.

 set off the ladies like a frame.

 across the years to our own time.
 I'll end my tale some other time.
 and manners of an earlier time.
 is out of fashion in our time.
 has found an end before his time.
 advises him of dinner-time.
 of its unvarnished monochrome.
 our modern Russia's plague and bane.
 ensconced beside the window-pane.
 his mother taps the window-pane.
 a hybrid cross of cat and crane.
 he knew too well that sort of scene.
 No doubt about it, it's Eugene.
 where Tanya now confronts Eugene.

 no paradise can stay serene.

 and wore his dressing-gown to dine.
 may then amuse my glad decline.
 her soul was waiting... for someone.
 dumb I must perish, and alone.
 all blend into Eugene alone.
 ``where master used to sit alone.
 whisper repeated to the crone.
 in a melodious, flute-like tone.
 is graven on that face of stone.
 sings as he plaits a humble shoe.
 and ease his catch with all due care.
 with cause that I've recalled them here.
 P&eacute;tri de vanit&eacute;, il avait encore plus de cette esp&egrave;ce d'orgueil qui fait avouer avec la m&ecirc;me indiff&eacute;rence les bonnes comme les mauvaises actions, suite d'un sentiment de sup&eacute;riorit&eacute; peut-&ecirc;tre imaginaire.
 this soul that glowed with virgin fire.
 the best revenge one could desire.

 nor crawled in suppliant attire.

 6 Gentleman, squire.
 they'd settled that some years before.
 is mincing manners - nothing more.
 on her smug face a flush of pleasure.
 or servants waiting on her pleasure.
 1 Vasily Levshin (1746-1826), writer on gardening and agriculture.
 he has to bring the battle-case.
 and portents of the lunar phase.
 Tanya thanks each one with a phrase.
 by sighs of passion or by praise.
 at such vivacious, free good sense.
 was his absorption in their sense.
 has hardly mastered postal prose.
 resigned disposal of your fate.

 the man of honour and of sense.

 and every night shares her repose.
 of ranks and ages so diverse.
 its winds had blown him far off course.
 Elle &eacute;tait fille, elle &eacute;tait amoureuse.
 to pranks and jokes of earlier date.
 fresh leaves... for such is heaven's mandate.
 he would have found a normal fate.
 the entire story of your fate.
 you'll never leave me to my fate.
 leave far behind that city-gate.
 a vulgar touch. I can't translate.
 for swapping bullets with my mate.
 where her security's complete.
 coated with a thin layer of spite.
 and put them on a paced-out site.
 3 ``Rout (Eng.), an evening assembly without dancing; means properly crowd.'' Pushkin's note.

 3 ``"Tomcat calls Kit" - a song foretelling marriage.'' Pushkin's note.

 3 ``Sweet-sounding Greek names like Agathon... etc., are only current in Russia among the common people.'' Pushkin's note.
 9 ``Lasciate ogni speranza, voi ch'entrate. Our modest author has translated only the first part of the famous verse.'' Pushkin's note.
 2 ``See the descriptions of the Finnish winter in Baratynsky's Eda''. Pushkin's note.
 him far enough through wild and waste.
 and an insouciant lorgnette.
 to the first meanings of his flute.
 inside the Larins' house fell mute.
 but now it bores me every minute.
 an inn at each stage of the route.
 slave of the service, was en route.
 you've paid insanity its due.
 our vessel's long been overdue.
 her journey home is overdue.
 as he descended to the grave.

 4 See note 1 to Chapter Five.

 promptly had nothing left to give.
 had only debts on which to live.
 in her once more has come alive.
 like fields in spring when storms arrive.
 at last the final hours arrive.
 of tears will cloud her tender gaze.
 has fixed on her a steady gaze.
 more and more brightly still they blaze.
 or pining, Olga's hours were brief.
 his sweetheart faithful to her grief.
 4 Serfs chosen as recruits for the army had their forelock cut off.
 it was quite torn in half and breaking.
 Tatyana flushed, and started shaking.
 night of the second, started flaking.
 Straight up the chimney, pipes were smoking.

 6 Slavonic god of love.

 It's over. Supper is proceeding.
 They've missed Eugene's completed etching.
 all a pure maiden's love was breathing.
 The hearth was low beyond all stoking.
 ``Why, Tanya, what...?'' ``All's dull and trifling.
 respect, and mercy for my dreaming.
 awaits him - hears nobody coming.
 the occupations of the morning.
 a mansion stands just round a turning.
 comes clearer through the mists of dawning.
 no vision of her fields is dawning.
 Olga's adorer comes a-wooing.
 and sideways her poor head is stooping.
 beside his heavier half is snoring.

 the nightingale's begun to sing.

 they're on the dance-floor, waltzing, spinning.
 Zaretsky watched, and stood there grinning.
 would leave her dithering and tossing.
 about one thing, till our next meeting.
 Hours pass; no answer; waiting, waiting.
 a soul so innocent, so trusting.
 they're plunging, whirling, all but squatting.
 They laugh. The guests begin arriving.
 now golden autumn's just arriving.
 my hours in fear and bitter crying.
 that modish rings were still a-buying.
 at heart by grim remorse's freezing.
 11 Russian poet and translator from the French.
 crossed to the window, read it through.
 he eyes the door, looks slyly through.

 champion of rights, as in the wrong.

 I hear the wrath of your reproach.
 and take due warning from my speech.
 custom's bestowed us from on high.
 a madrigal for epitaph.
 all shout and argue, laugh and squeak.
 they managed to disperse the pack.
 their journey took them a full week.
 you too have seen on Neva's brink.
 to gasp, and on a bench to sink.
 like Delvig3 when he's dining drunk.
 or else a query's wondering hook.
 and then a stroll in Letny Park.
 Relations. No-one else at all.
 the keys that opened up the hall.

 she flies no more, she's lost her strength.

 but here we must control our mouth.
 my noon is here, and that's the truth.
 La, sotto giorni nubilosi e brevi.
 and sleeping sounder than a rock.
 already she'd assume ill-luck.
 his elegies flow like a brook.
 amateur of caprice and quirk.
 7 Probably an allusion to Bulg&aacute;rin, an unfriendly critic of Pushkin's work.
 in this fifth chapter of my work.
 and coachmen swear, and women squeal.
 Vladimir Nabokov's rendering into unrhymed iambics reproduces the exact meaning, but explicitly disclaims any further ambition. While Nabokov admits that in losing its rhyme the work loses its ``bloom'' he argues, irrefutably, that no rhyming version can be literally accurate. It can however certainly strive for something else. It can attempt to produce some substitute for the ``bloom'' of the original, without which the work is completely dead. It can try to convey the poet's tone of voice, whether world-weary or romantic, the sparkle of his jokes, the flavour of his epigrams, the snap of his final couplets. None of these effects can emerge from a purely literal unrhymed translation. In fact, to offset the inevitable loss in verbal exactness, a rhyming version can aim at a different sort of accuracy, an equivalence or parallelism conveying, however faintly, the impact of the original.
 like foliage in the rotting fall.
 are old times, and the servants' hall.
 packed from the maids' wing to the hall.
 ``No, no, I'm sure the party's small.

 direct from shipboard into ball.

 in sheepskin coat with scarlet sash.
 4 Jean Lepage, Parisian gunsmith.
 a seedling fallen in the earth.
 were served in order of their rank.
 in stars upon the river-brink.
 and, in her hand, a small French book.
 at the Academic Diction-book.
 deep in distraction, his own rook.
 and volume three of Marmontel.
 he'd got annoyed, the tricky devil.
 and in full brilliance shines the ball.
 guests bow, feet scrape, and children squall.
 and teaching children how to spell.
 is needed, nothing's left to tell.

 with scorn to make my world a hell.

 and never played a shrewder trick.
 Onegin has outrun us all.
 to tales that young moustachios tell.
 Still for ever, fare thee well.
 in which our hero used to dwell.
 spirit that anguish had made ill.
 can read enough to get my fill.
 she finds in river and in hill.
 A new acquaintance claims our quill.
 then he presents her with the scroll.
 and watched a different world unroll.
 or else lifts up a fallen shawl.
 into an unbecoming brawl.
 arch-commentator of the dream.
 or for that Demon4 of my dream.

 with sighs unconsciously regretful.

 and swarming in his inmost soul.
 oppressed her like a heavy dream.
 its barely noticeable stream.
 condemned the millstones as a sham.
 stretched on a sofa, calls to greet them.
 and redcurrants throw at him.
 they while away the morning's calm.
 and festal evenings in the gloom.
 enticing nets to do them harm.
 so effortlessly can disarm.
 to look like sad romanticism.
 at soldier-husbands, and the drum.
 and feel once more emotion's ban.
 my strange, incorrigible man.

 a marksman crouching in the green.

 of chalk the window-panes have taken.
 our joy in you is warmly taken.
 e sempre bene, gentlemen.
 a swift, polite reply is written.
 she appears before him, grim and frozen.
 and looks out on the darkened plain.
 No, all in her was calm and plain.
 to hit the target: thigh or brain.
 God grant you took at least a grain.
 runs after what is sweet, and vain.
 once more renounces world and din.
 in midst of trouble, storm or din.
 13 Evgeny Baratynsky (1800-1844). Poet and friend of Pushkin.
 3 Anton Delvig, poet and close friend of Pushkin.
 4 Poet and acquaintance of Pushkin.

 as sacred, lies before me still.

 She sits down by the window-sill.
 and records of a heart in pain.
 7 Stanzas XXXVII, XXXVIII and XLIII were discarded by Pushkin.
 10 Name left blank by Pushkin.
 our terror is their consolation.
 a hideous deal of tribulation.
 to give you honest explanation.
 Tatyana's name day celebration.
 would have been spared this laceration.
 and once again received a crown.
 that self-same evening where he'd go.
 out of this world will crowd us too.
 still eats and drinks enough for two.
 himself just like a simple chap.

 2 Stanzas XV, XVI and XXXVIII were discarded by Pushkin.

 6 These lines and the first twelve lines of stanza XLVII were discarded by Pushkin.
 1 Stanzas I to VI were discarded by Pushkin.
 2 Stanzas VIII and IX and XXXIX were discarded by Pushkin.
 1 Stanza left incomplete by Pushkin.
 on which the world is doomed to spin.
 3 A statuette of Napoleon.
 Evgeny thought in just this fashion.
 Then Tanya hears of the decision.
 stands in dismay and indecision.
 he sends a letter, penned with passion.
 at eighteen years, to some compassion.
 will anger you in its confession.
 all brought to life at your direction.
 She was alone, lit by the moon.
 Translation by Charles H. Johnston.

 She wanders on without direction.

 bribe-taker, glutton and buffoon.
 became their scrutiny's concern.
 the festal name day has begun.
 and trembles like a hunted fawn.
 were from his vision quite withdrawn.
 and read the books there on her own.
 has driven off, to find his own.
 to be the bride I'd call my own.
 the darling sex is light as down.
 if not slow-witted, might have known.
 to bee and butterfly unknown.
 her to the altar and the crown.
 to vice, while virtue got its crown.
 bed-time, and time for guests to go.
 since I stopped sinning years ago.

 2 Lines discarded by Pushkin.

 of grammar, Russian language too.
 and ran far off... the Muse came too.
 like irksome phantoms, null as zero.
 Enough, my friends; it's all so-so.
 4 This Russianized version of the Greek Agatho is ``elephantine and rustic to the Russian ear''. Nabokov. See note 3 to Chapter Two.
 Tatyana's heart is rent in two.
 a quilted chamber-robe and cap.
 in flannel, and an old fur cap.
 and all the world is buried deep.
 the maidens all are slumbering deep.

 the heartache that they bring lies deep.
 she never even bit her lip.
 and, any moment, down he'll slip.

 bassoons and flutes begin to trip.

 almost as good as a dim lamp.
 with parks and mansions, open up.
 with a small tray and a teacup.
 Buy&aacute;nov tried - got flea in ear.
 is ``Kit''3 to every maiden's ear.
 for the first time the Muse came near.
 to see the grave, and shed a tear.
 as linen's brought for him to wear.
 no, Tanya's more endearing far.
 and parted from her by their star.
 and exclamations, and good cheer.
 Tatyana now need wait no longer.
 She's in the wood, the bear still trails her.
 15 Pierre Bayle, French philosopher.
 7 Dominique de Pradt (1759-1837), voluminous French political writer.

 1 Notes are at end of each chapter.

 a blank default would suit me better.
 ``She's not in love?'' ``There's no one, ever.
 And Ivan Petushk&oacute;v; no, never.
 even in joke the heart won't shiver.
 toward the neighbouring valley's river.
 her face would pale, she'd start to quiver.
 so nearly had them in his power.
 to whisper it her inmost prayer.
 don't waste your efforts on the air.
 the moon in its azure of air.
 of Twelfth Night's chillest, iciest air.
 and shout, and make room for the pair.
 November stood outside the door.
 all stand. He walks towards the door.

 and sets her gently on the floor.

 made London's dandy his professor.
 the linen stretched on the tambour.
 defeated, turned up at his neighbour's.
 as if spellbound, Tatyana stands.
 and neighbours, followed the same ends.
 and tedious means to festive ends.
 I know too surely how it ends.
 persisted and made no amends.
 on the cotillion, as amends.
 and junior Ensign in the Guards.
 6 Admiral Alexander Shishkov (1754-1841) championed the purity ot the Russian language against the encroachment of foreign words.
 and, in the yard, stand eighteen jades.
 fieldward, in noisy swarm, the bees.
 and ananas, the gold of trees.
 and almost swoons, and almost dies.

 just what the nightmare signifies.

 is there to lisp its pack of lies.
 in a still stream that never dries.
 using overt or covert rules.
 as smoke in azure sky disperses.
 for the two ladies at the gates.
 the thoughts of my two anchorites.
 To live, it hurries, and to feel it hastes.
 an album's loose and floating sheaves.
 that fills him and in which he lives.
 to drown the hiss of modish wives.
 of kindling smiles in ladies' eyes.
 away from trusting his own eyes.
 frontwise and back, that way and this.
 1 Caf&eacute;-restaurant in Paris.

 it blabs, and spills them in its tracks.

 when our Zaretsky met his eyes.
 the tears in stream pour down her cheeks.
 to pass for cultured in our ranks.
 old mother winter at her pranks.
 entered his sentence in the books.
 some disagreeable remarks.
 brings out its faro pack, and deals.
 and up the rustling curtain crawls.
 in limpid verse that lives and gleams.
 I'll set two ages by the ears.
 and than these letters, and these tears.
 before my gaze began to pass.
 his soul with murmurs of distress.
 doubted of it, so lived in bliss.
 the earlier griefs are what I miss.

 brushes for teeth, brushes for nails.

 in empty deeds and futile toils.
 in boxes or the rows of stalls.
 down to the plain in turbid rills.
 bludgeon the sense; it faints and whirls.
 Apart from the overall difficulty of his task, the translator with ambitions of this type will find that Pushkin's work presents him with two particular problems.
 of Bogdan&oacute;vich's11 refrains.
 of ladies and of freakish fops.
 The choirs of dancers sought their quarters.
 with the resounding chime of glass.
 the winter's ways are smooth as glass.
 how pleasantly the stages pass.
 and locked him in a dark recess.
 the imperturbable princess.
 in fact a thorough fop, no less.

 by now he's driving home to dress.

 or kiss the border of her dress.
 the matchwood chatters as it lights.
 if I show wit in jesting thus.
 ``At the Larins'!'' ``But how mysterious.
 yes, even there its triumph grows.
 and rest myself from earlier days.
 adorning all its country ways.
 and by the sound of silly joys.
 the new ballet he should be at.
 the big room, further, not a cat.
 so all went smoothly after that.
 and sang me to the altar-mat.
 sent to seduce? Resolve my doubt.
 with pleasure on his vengeful act.
 tradition still keeps my respect.

 against each other swift, small feet.

 of certain ladies' tiny feet.
 after her own room, makes her fret.
 ladies who glide on waxed parquet.
 bathed in the moon's inspiring light.
 Tatyana'd rise by candlelight.
 or dim her, dazzle as she might.
 come to disturb me and affright.
 repeats what her mama has taught.
 I have to drag my feet to it.
 of simple product supplements it.
 their tendency to call, and sit.
 of sumptuous flowers and luscious fruit.
 a simple monument is built.
 5 The week before Lent.

 La morale est dans la nature des choses.

 12 French poet (1755-1814). Author of Po&eacute;sies Erotiques.
 in britzkas, kib&iacute;tkas and sleighs.
 the heart and all its fragile dreams.
 the odious bear still grunts and lumbers.
 propped in the door among the press.
 and, on the crosses, jackdaw hosts.
 and on her lips a light smile plays.
 has never staked his family seat.
 to catch the eye and to attract.
 Eugene as clever, and quite sweet.
 in winter was her heart's delight.
 found for its utterance that night.
 now sweet, his slumbers are distraught.
 and home he drives, deep-sunk in thought.
 in fact by some quite different thought.

 the girl's attentive eyes are bent.

 where a sharp nail has made a dent.
 I am much indebted to my friends Sir Sacheverell Sitwell, for his interest and support, and Sir John Balfour, for his searching and constructive criticism of the translation; to Professor Gleb Struve, for generously giving me the benefit of his unrivalled scholarship and insight; above all, to my wife Natasha, for her loving encouragement.
 of rugs, and carpets' rich refinement.
 smoothe his way out with humour's ointment.
 that's where my years of youth were spent.
 wedlock for us would be abhorrent.
 will in a flash decide his lot.
 of the Terpsichorean foot.
 a young girl's looking-glass is kept.
 Now all was still. Tatyana slept.
 but now I've rather lost the art.
 they'd just enrage it with their dart.
 a full confession of the heart.
 I'm grateful now with all my heart.

 the wilful fancies of the heart.

 was just created for the part.
 ``Go, nurse, and leave me here apart.
 it may be late, but it's a start.
 a faster, stronger pulsing start.
 passion and dreams of pensive cast.
 and faithful wife I'd have been cast.
 in which his hero's mould was cast.
 as well-read, though of pedant cast.
 the two foes stand with eyes downcast.
 sorceress-winter's here at last.
 sent at the Colonel's own behest.
 deceived, was overjoyed to rest.
 her seal with its engraven crest.
 2 Count F. P. Tolstoy (1783-1873), well-known artist.
 but never asked her husband first.

 it's hidden deep in gloom and dust.

 as horses whirled him through the dust.
 No matter; fate's decree is just.
 the Russian for le comme il faut.
 the days that doom has measured out.
 Tatyana heard Evgeny out.
 she burst into a coughing-bout.
 among the neighbours round about.
 and strip the forest round about.
 glitters with hoar-frost all about.
 Today it's turn and turn about.
 Anyway, it should be possible now, with the help of Nabokov's literal translation and commentary, to produce a reasonably accurate rhyming version of Pushkin's work which can at least be read with pleasure and entertainment, and which, ideally, might even be able to stand on its own feet as English. That, in all humility, is the aim of the present text.
 of Richardson and of Rousseau.
 or something tenderer still, for you.
 5 ``A deliberate accumulation of conventional poetical formulae by means of which Pushkin mimics poor Lensky's own style... but the rich and original metaphor of the deserted house, closed inner shutters, whitened window-panes, departed female owner (the soul being feminine in Russian), with which XXXII ends, is Pushkin's own contribution, a sample as it were of what he can do.'' Nabokov.

 when little notes come on a tray.

 secretly overheard by you.
 10 Magazine (1818) edited by A. Izmaylov.
 the Corsair, or the Wandering Jew.
 ``It's nothing.'' And away he flew.
 to us, though, not exactly new.
 the jagged flint's pulled back anew.
 now I've forgotten all I knew.
 and flown like arrows from a bow.
 to Tanya, all's an empty show.
 the man who laid her brother low.
 he gazed out on the threatening glow.
 must be my theme, if you'll allow.
 until the dawn beneath her pillow.
 the altar flame's extinguished now.
 or on the granite of the bay.

 in dark attire the new-born day.

 the same as any other day.
 he was a poet in his day.
 was undiscovered to that day.
 to fresh grandparents every day.
 and then sat silent all the way.
 high time he should be on his way.
 the grand barouche is on its way.
 her grief, and nearly ran away.
 even if he drops or pines away.
 they leave their shores and fly away.
 No word: another day goes by.
 the potholes make the coach unsteady.
 5 Satiric poem by Ivan Dimitriev, 1795. The reference is - summarizing very briefly - to a controversy between different literary cliques about the relative merits of the classic ode and the romantic elegy.
 They take her too to the Assembly.

 to captivate, and then to fly.

 thickly the exclamations fly.
 as pair by pair the dancers fly.
 Onegin still is slumbering deeply.
 who swaggers in with the reply.
 will give you a complete reply.
 ``he dandled me as a small boy.
 treated his lessons as a ploy.
 brooding that is the lover's ploy.
 addressed to Onegin''... ...'Well, that's easy.
 8 Nina Voronskoy, imaginary belle of Petersburg society.
 of old-lime hospitality.
 All flourishing; they send their duty.
 in order daily, chez V&eacute;ry,1
 but I'm allergic to the North...1
 her steppeland charms into a rout.3

 the jug of bilberry wine is seen.1

 cartoonist-pencils of Saint-Priest;11
 and melancholy as Svetlana,2
 with amber pipes from Tsaregrad;12
 ... &gt;2
 the lover of Julie Wolmar,3
 could not conceive how solemn Grimm13
 He looks, and answers: ``Agafon.''4
 Madame de Sta&euml;l, Bichat,13 Tissot,14
 Notes1 234
 Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 2801 John Street, Markham, Ontario, Canada L3R IB4
 and Malek Adel,4 de Linar,5
 he read of course the sceptic Bayle15
 Eugene Onegin 35
 I too - when I recall Svetlana5

 the fools who sparkle far and wide,6

 He was a good and simple barin;6
 XXXVI6
 This translation first published 1977
 XLIII7
 &lt; XXXVII7
 and the derivative Knyazhn&iacute;n:8
 Introduction by John Bayley 9
 ``Abandon hope for evermore.''9
 two sisters who'd received the initial,9
 Translator's Note 29
 Copyright &copy; Charles Johnston, 1977, 1979
 Introduction copyright &copy; John Bayley, 1979
 Published with minor revisions and an Introduction in Penguin Classics 1979
 Secondly, he must be on his guard against the ludicrous effect that the feminine ending (for instance the pleasure/measure rhyme, which is so much derided by Nabokov) can all too easily produce in English. He must not sing, like Prince Gremin in one English version of Chaykovsky's opera:
 but now my brain is darkened, Tanya:

 she finds, in order alphabetic:

 they rise and ripen and fall dead:
 of entertaining the half-dead:
 first snow for shoulders, breast and head:
 the ballroom drove me off my head:
 billiards are dropped, cue put to bed:
 in fashion that's half-glad, half-anguished:
 you left no steps that could be tracked:
 and pledged to you, and firmly planned:
 in terms where not a word was spared:
 and nothing in her look is altered:
 on Eugene, he was deeply stirred:
 no one was ever so engrossed:
 the thought sank in, and penetrated:
 where two old pinetrees stand united:

 ``Poor Yorick,'' said he, broken-hearted:

 he found too much that he regretted:
 sweet old tradition was preserved:
 by nervous hands of a schoolmaid:
 then, stepping nearer, Eugene said:
 times were when I was sharp and bold:
 until the grave by your strong hand:
 the letter from Tatyana's hand:
 a hidden beauty in the end:
 and give her comfort to the end:
 you kept your friendship with our friend:
 in any picture of this kind:
 can yet keep nail-care much in mind:
 commands our rhymester-brotherhood:
 out of the hand of that same bard:
 Olga's no life in her regard:

 I really dote upon the word:

 have each asked him to a soir&eacute;e:
 the men confront them, face to face:
 too faint to stir a further pace:
 a few books had escaped disgrace:
 At least I'll give him some advice:
 there was a softness in his glance:
 set to well-known children's glee:
 to be respected all through life:
 how sad the scar of passion's knife:
 bright Northern Cleopatra she:
 then quietly at last says she:
 is with dull trash that can't cohere:
 Now hear the friends in dialogue:
 ages we'd never heard of love:

 I need to rest from all this rhyme:

 will disappear as fast as smoke:
 with this the hero of my tale:
 found that in laughter yawns could stifle:
 Louder and louder sounds the wrangle:
 nothing you did gave cause for blame:
 the girls sing out the ancient rhyme:
 youth's choice, the flower of French cuisine:
 dreamt of reproving what they'd done:
 lend ears to my lugubrious tone:
 Moscow has beauties and to spare:
 I keep them, and will quote them here:
 Onegin looks with eyes of fire:
 of tales of girls, and ghosts, and lore:
 reflection or provoked dispute:
 your early life, unlock your tongue:

 all was material for transcribing:

 and Paris too. But hear my pleading:
 be good enough to go on reading:
 He mounts the sledge, with daylight fading:
 bottles to which some pitch is clinging:
 audacious tunnels will be marching:
 calls out his name... All unavailing:
 and wakened Lensky by exclaiming:
 I see another problem looming:
 among the guests a general dinning:
 and stops his doleful heart from sleeping:
 Tatyana dear, with you I'm weeping:
 He finds the shock beyond all bearing:
 soon all that went without a wrench:
 any Madonna by Van Dyck:

 and sighs, and asks oneself all through:

 Meanwhile Onegin starts to languish:
 over it a mysterious wreath:
 There once I too strolled back and forth:
 says the old lady in a croak:
 makes to her nurse low-voiced remark:
 and sink to prose's humble level:
 enquired the lady of the hall:
 But now Vladimir's doubts are still:
 I drop my hero... I'll be truthful:
 at sunken wax inside a bowl:
 and even honourable man:
 Up to the porch our hero's driven:
 yet he'd back you through thick and thin:
 Tatyana pined in secret fashion:
 gives way to nature's normal passion:

 so long as they're employed in song:

 the infant year with cheerful greeting:
 with lies and jokes that packed a punch:
 held in constraint by pity's touch:
 of traveller's tedium at its peak:
 these words are not of Russian stock:
 his thoughts were on a distant goal:
 But ever stranger and more fearful:
 Tatyana turned with thirsting soul:
 You've guessed before it all began:
 the rogue has got a finger frozen:
 My friends, the bard stirs your compassion:
 hell's terrifying imprecation:
 then, on the last page, the suggestion:
 On the first sheet you'll find a question:

 then quickly something changed all this:

 and roused the village long ago:
 No, soon she changed her old demeanour:
 with tears, in quarters of the maids:
 The protocol is all one wishes:
 Tatyana looks, her faintness passes:
 but Eugene's out from din and press:
 they all still keep their old impress:
 those monkeys of the good old days:
 Olinka and her mother sent:
 active, and hopeful, and insistent:
 I acted thoughtlessly or not:
 about what's buried in the past:
 praised his fierce courage in its day:
 on Christmas Eve, he wished me joy:
 and, under, ``toute &agrave; vous Annette'';

 when we begin to talk of verse);

 with every sort of home possession:
 Sign of the urge for domination:
 I gave no rein to sweet affection:
 The Larins kept the old tradition:
 Fate saved Evgeny from perdition:
 to demonstrate some signs of reason:
 her heart had long been overrun:
 while dear Tatyana's youth grows dimmer:
 Conjecture found unending matter:
 (the reader thinks the rhyme is lilies:
 the prince looks at him, and replies:
 the funeral monument explains:
 jaws masticate as minutes pass:
 will blossom into splendid highways:

 you're sure to find her portrait in it:

 in your pursuit I've come to know it:
 Listen to me without resentment:
 and should have played a different part:
 in other things you come off best:
 with each nuance of wintry glow:
 I'd still like dances to this day:
 like a sweet child. She'll never say:
 But you're not sociable, they say:
 his hours to dreaming them away:
 ``You don't see what to do? that's funny:
 in unison repeat the cry:
 but Tanya found she couldn't cry:
 That isn't our immediate worry:
 Praskovya re-baptized ``Polina'';
 in Adam Smith was his diploma;

 Buy&aacute;nov whirls off Pustyakova;

 Eugene's response was automatic;
 of spring he lives, he's energetic;
 the grey-haired nurse with kerchiefed head;
 before the fire a table's spread;
 he'd sack the Muses and get wedded;
 By chance those verses haven't vanished;
 Wildly the fearful laughter pealed;
 beneath a shroud that's all dishevelled;
 in bed, a young man, stiff and chilled;
 her manner is no less contained;
 how many follies were engendered;
 if you come with me, they'll be flattered;
 filled him with thoughts that swarmed and whirred;
 they've moved around and been reseated;

 The clock of doom had struck as fated;

 on dining-chairs are all prostrated;
 by deep and shady woods protected;
 the vales dry out, grow brightly printed;
 the downy woods are greener-tinted;
 perhaps for fame, he was endowed;
 and blood had bubbled as it flowed;
 and soon will day's bright tune be played;
 while she's from top to toe surveyed;
 more searching than Chateaubriand;
 and on their marks has made them stand;
 same Pom, same husband to the end;
 his choice could shock or might offend;
 in grief that nothing else could mend;
 Martin Zad&eacute;ka fails to mend;
 unfathomable to the mind;

 by dreary snowdrifts piled around;

 gazes at all the scene around;
 as it assembles them around;
 close as a shadow on the ground;
 with our poor girl was kind and good;
 and wrecked the flooring-boards for good;
 there's not a word she's understood;
 and everything is cramped and loud;
 up the hillside at breakneck pace;
 sigh, and stood up, began to pace;
 their joyous way across the ice;
 girls' albums, signed in blood for choice;
 such good and sensible advice;
 from any gentlemanly distance;
 into the tomb's mysterious shade;

 how I interpret this expression:

 had long proved tedious to distraction:
 the wine-addict adores the cup:
 at the same moment in her ear:
 so Lensky answered the old dear:
 She hesitates, and doubts beset her:
 they talk of her, of how and whether:
 feeling to what had long been heartless:
 And with a smile the world caressed us:
 gave up the ancient Kremlin-keys:
 on me, all this has no effect:
 is this - one sees from here the party:
 I'm old, my mind is blunted, Tanya;
 rapture was just two weeks ahead;
 and heartless pleasure was up-graded;
 a hundred times afresh distorted;

 spoke words of hope? But who are you:

 a simple Russian family night:
 despite herself, rehearsed the part:
 at my famed portrait and will say:
 each of us has his favourite lobby:
 in flowers of spring it's drinking dry:
 he's dreadfully dissatisfied;
 her hands affectionately pressed;
 the strophe over which I slaved;
 at thirty, lucratively wed;
 she doesn't see, or doesn't mind;
 the source's chattering voice is heard;
 while a mazurka holds the crowd;
 play on the window's frosted lace;
 would launch into self-sacrifice;

 conversing in a singsong voice;

 I've paid my due to classic art:
 when he arrived; not in the slightest:
 explodes; wine fizzes up... but stay:
 there Didelot10 crowned himself with glory:
 no deathless truths, nothing scholastic;
 Lel6 floats about above her head;
 to drive the swooning senses mad;
 Russian pancakes were always served;
 had been imposed by winter's hand;
 had come to him in field and glade;
 past the grand ladies, see her glide;
 to help her from the other side;
 Tatyana groaned above the tide;
 with demoiselles of riper age;
 not even in her earliest age;

 they heap up silver with a spade;

 since then my heart was wrenched aside;
 that I prefer to Champagne's tide;
 becomes a horse for all to see;
 Horses and coach are spliced in marriage;
 is seized by Tambov's poet-sage;
 Omens dismayed her with their presage;
 at first she had no heart to range;
 and in her grief seemed fit to die;
 for what's been given us to take;
 bear's gone; a hallway, no mistake;
 and shouts suggest a crowded wake;
 years back, to call up many a fable;
 who never learnt how dreamers babble;
 who never scorned the social rabble;

 and frames would shudder, windows tremble;

 he laughs - they all begin to chuckle;
 He nods - they start to fuss and truckle;
 foretells for her some wondrous role;
 there's yap of pugs, and laughs, and bustle;
 allow no rest to you or me;
 self-willed it may be just the same;
 grew hardened to life's frosty clime;
 no brilliant truth, no vivid scene;
 sang for the guests above the wine;
 Eugene takes Olga, and is gone;
 to infuriate a clumsy foe;
 Pikht&iacute;n, of the Hussars, was here;
 the faces met with everywhere;
 of sighs, and compliments, and fire;
 secret sledge-rides in verse of fire;

 the full fruit of her heart's desire;

 jealousy's flame, to light desire;
 I could describe here his attire;
 his converse gave Onegin pleasure;
 on stage are thumping without cease;
 I never lived or wrote for praise;
 for tempests and for feasts and noise;
 the all&eacute;e to the lake, the copse;
 were all the law that I would use;
 the pillars of the turnpike-gate;
 scarcely recalled their love, their spite;
 in ink with colour-wash above;
 its furrow through the powdery icing;
 while in the hut a girl is singing;
 Now Tanya's groaning, now she's sighing;

 and for her cheeks to cease their blushing;

 the horses fidget worse and worse;
 sets out upon her homeward course;
 their unattractive t&ecirc;te-&agrave;-t&ecirc;te;
 is tinsel on a life I hate;
 he'd see his soul cool in its grate;
 relined and strengthened for the drive;
 men made their bows, and sought her eye;
 not only by Evgeny's eye;
 behind her followed wildly dancing;
 Bacchante-like, her flighty prancing;
 after your drive, it's quite back-breaking;
 when night patrol's a perilous calling;
 you'd made appearance in my dreaming;
 to drop all that old-fashioned mumming;
 shelter for trysts at every turning;

 one wallows in delicious weeping;

 still coughing, hissing, clapping, champing;
 her golden earrings off and whipping;
 the clink of rowels, met his hearing;
 here's tea that Olga's been preparing;
 everything's dim and unenthusing;
 even the scandal's not amusing;
 she's nearly swooned, she's suffocating;
 he wakes; a bath where ice is floating;
 what came from this unlooked-for meeting;
 a story that still wants completing;
 that there his friend Kav&eacute;rin's5 waiting;
 We too shall find our hour is waiting;
 Just facing Tanya's where they're sitting;
 he murmurs: ``Olga's mine for saving;

 and all is lost beyond retrieving;

 lies bright, and vast beyond perceiving;
 and good old sun more seldom glowing;
 Bubbles like Hippocrene are spraying;
 it's new to us, beyond gainsaying;
 neighbours in high content are wheezing;
 the Russian N, like N in French;
 once I too liked it very much;
 a portrait with a charming touch;
 breaks a new passage with his sleigh;
 impatient, hatred flaming high;
 and offer to that ash a sigh;
 the bloom has withered on the bough;
 choked up. There's no wreath on the bough;
 and arm in arm they all go through;
 I count each hour the whole day through;

 Dear Tanya, you're condemned to perish;

 accounts, shaved forelocks,4 Sunday bath;
 towards the simple urn beneath;
 bringing her unity and strength;
 parodies winter in the south;
 nanny, companion of my youth;
 a crayfish rides on spider-back;
 and swaggers in a red calpack;
 the branches of the oak with flock;
 across the fields, round hill and rock;
 the heart inside him seemed to shrink;
 by Lensky in his Olga's book;
 by ancient limes, or by a brook;
 the cooks prepare the midday meal;
 I find myself no longer equal;

 had killed his best friend in a duel;

 more closely at the grammar-book;
 was finding leisure's vacuum cruel;
 I have no leisure to recall;
 shall make my story grim as hell;
 he trembles, knows not what to tell;
 he reached the stream below the hill;
 at two-ball billiards prove his skill;
 he scowls - and the whole gang are still;
 engaged then - but against her will;
 he drinks - all shout and take a swill;
 the kiss where youth and freshness gleam;
 meanwhile a hallboy handed cream;
 ``My uncle - high ideals inspire him;
 claiming Tatyana'd found her man;
 walked homeward round the kitchen garden;

 that wit embarrasses the dull;

 to the complacent and the null;
 with Olga, all have pierced her soul;
 in her torn heart - a fickle gleam;
 has taken on a silvery gleam;
 to spoil loose paper by the ream;
 the shady wood, the talking stream;
 life's real meaning would have found him;
 already there she stands beside him;
 despite herself, is Lensky's doom;
 far-distant heaven's vaulted room;
 clears in a flash the freezing room;
 but now the mansion is forsaken;
 you find the country godforsaken;
 Departure date's long overtaken;

 levy their tribute on the plain;

 Moments of silence, quite unbroken;

 comrades despised, and comrades rotten;
 The sky is clear, the earth is frozen;
 fat P&uacute;styakov has driven in;
 in that new couch, no sleep for certain;
 and parts the fringes of his curtain;
 with comedies of swarm and din;
 whose serfs are miserably thin;
 alone, with no adornment on;
 the sufferings of tempestuous passion;
 to battle further with my passion;
 Zaretsky rose without discussion;

 dear Tanya, lover of illusion;

 and all our modish education;
 rebuffed, found instant consolation;
 Compliment and congratulation;
 And home was now their destination;
 the coach has reached its destination;
 and always the self-same objection;
 is lost in obstinate reflection;
 ``I've dreams and years past resurrection;
 The flirt has reason's cool volition;
 I'm blind to every apparition;
 a truly noble disposition;
 she drinks it like a priceless potion;
 and it deceived us in return;
 as battles go, I've not begun;

 from daybreak valleys lift the sun;

 in the full beauty of its frown;
 the latest fashions of the town;
 I married. I beseech you, go;
 she flies as fast as she can go;
 thought them a pointless peccadillo;
 her handkerchief has fallen too;
 but spared no glance for Cicero;
 that night, in secret, set for two;
 over the waters in a sweep;
 the letter trembles in her grip;
 delicious novels, laps them up;
 I drag my footsteps hither, yonder;
 and from within come noise and cheer;
 No moralizing from this joker;
 clock in the country rings the hour;

 with his forefathers would seem better;

 their lords, and thwack their palms together;
 faceted muzzles by the rammer;
 spelt hazard, ruin and disaster;
 add vale when he signed a letter;
 still as a shadow, grim and bitter;
 Our love is what they most abhor;
 the logs; the wild ones have the floor;
 from table, clattering on the floor;
 Now Latin's gone quite out of favour;
 its sails go flap-flap as it prances;

 the jams appear in little dishes;
 no one recalls him or his verses;
 all sorts of hopeless appetites;

 and thought, a sleepy numbness steals;

 to sleep some black and empty dreams;
 poor Tanya more intensely burns;
 I thought, she'll go this time, perhaps;
 that youthful soul, which pined for sadness;
 reap a brief harvest on their furrows;
 and every plea that lips can treat;
 your heels will squash the ladies' toes! &gt;
 all of an emptiness so killing - &gt;
 my word; no welshing, as I live. &gt;
 outside and in they star the night;
 still everywhere the lamps are bright;
 ``One winter's worth, you've surely got;
 and sat there as the minutes crept;
 heaven's will - for you I'm set apart;
 by some perverse schoolboy for sport;

 to stem the bloodstream's wild outburst;

 here's Petushk&oacute;v, the local fop;
 wine of the Comet6 fills the cup;
 with fright, she hears the approaching bear;
 the talk of guests when they appear;
 comes for awakening, comes for slumber;
 A backward look is fraught with danger;
 His life went sailing in calm weather;
 Some neighbours there have come together;
 I'll part them, bring them back together;
 Lovelace, or Grandison, or neither;
 bring up a table, and a taper;
 find, in the trivial, serious matter;
 glitters beneath its icing-sliver;
 he'd listen to the administrator;

 in corners whispering girls concur;

 by way of toast to their fair neighbour;
 There's powdery snow up to her knees;
 Love tyrannises all the ages;
 of swooning, Tanya nearly dies;
 of goblets, tall and slender pretties;
 that verse will turn to useful duties;
 brushes on thirty different scales;
 the guests squeeze closer to the centres;
 the footmen sleep on the pelisses;
 Onegin comes, and makes excuses;
 like fluff before Aeolian breezes;
 that ardent youth entirely lacks;
 the boxes; boiling, pit and stalls;
 the snow from all surrounding hills;
 adorns Aunt Helen, the princess;

 on unknown ladies in the tiers;

 a Russian family's old traditions;
 printed among outmoded airs;
 with an avowal just as artless;
 at least by a regretful kindness;
 that could sustain it? Only grimness;
 bespectacled, in tattered dress;
 the ladies' calculated dress;
 evoke for you a sombre bliss;
 culture, so far from healing, hurts us;
 in rose-trimmed bonnets, but malicious;
 the bear has raised her in his paws;
 and kisses smack as young girls greet;
 on her conquest, we leave my sweet;
 and good and bad are all mixed up. &gt;

 may wind up my career as poet;

 no move she makes, no breath she draws;
 right from the cradle of her days;
 by clearing every sort of debt;
 we'll draw it deeper in our net;
 once more he can't await the night;
 the happenings of the previous night;
 and prone to censure in our thought;
 ``Your modish world, I'll do without it;
 frozen in his tight-fitting suit;
 condemns the monde and its excitement;
 and I be by the world forgot;
 husband and father as my lot;
 my life in a domestic plot;
 two pines have tangled at the root;
 shall not attack my lily's root;

 of hope sometimes disturbs my heart;

 Tatyana hears but takes no part;
 and plaits a piebald shoe of bast;
 need not have bristled like a beast;
 now as before, inside my breast;
 to feasts and fun this winter past;
 he danced attendance with the best;
 a life-creating voice was lost;
 thank him by curtseying to the dust;
 or stirring annalistic must;
 on the highroad the wolves come out;
 a sham that trustful souls work out;
 the sumptuous palais shines out;
 We've many neighbours round about;
 into the social whirlabout;

 do fields echo with work and shout;

 ``Make way, make way,'' goes up the shout;
 ``Well, I won't hold you up or bore you;
 I'm at your service to protect you;
 She's dropped her sash's silken billow;
 and autumn lingered, long and slow;
 along the street lies dirty snow;
 Onegin had no word to say;
 with custom, love would fade away;
 an ace a dozen yards away;
 dowagers smiled as she went by;
 Onegin's life, you see, was holy;
 lacing her stays up very tightly;
 is deep in love, just like a boy;
 The two old ladies kiss and cry;
 once more Corneille's majestic story;

 with perturbation and with worry;

 the household boys in noisy rout;
 lived to the age of twenty-six;
 two hearts, a torch, and a nosegay;
 a shambling hoof along the way;
 a ball here, there a children's party;
 You'd never class her as a beauty;
 (as I've so oft in jest related)?
 My goddesses! Where are you banished?
 could it be she... or had he dreamed?
 away, so cool, so unconcerned?
 assembly, silent and dejected?
 lawgiver to the modish world?
 whither does all my yearning tend?
 Evgeny echoed him: ``My second?

 On whom alone can we depend?

 by the new whisper in the wood?
 with The Well-Meaner10 on her knee?
 as I recall a bygone age?
 Riding on the lugubrious prairie?
 a tempting plume for you to take?
 bursts with cold envy and with bile?
 what have your wits to do with me?
 torment of pride? And why's he come?
 to all that's trivial and inane?
 ``How long has he been on the scene?
 a slipper, or a magazine?
 daytimes and evenings passed alone?
 taken your place, though not your throne?
 is dressed, undressed, and dressed once more?
 Whom then to credit? Whom to treasure?

 For what charade is he apparelled?

 his acts and words to suit our end?
 someone like you and me, just nice?
 and I'll be thirty in a trice?
 whom shall we never find a bore?
 their table, and their hours of leisure?
 of youth, so tender, so intense?
 from cruel fortune such a fate?
 What trifling could be more complete?
 is this the riddle's missing clue?
 is this then what you can't forgive?
 why fight what's known to be decisive?
 it can't be youth's distemper - love?
 with years no more to meet our gaze?
 Now he's returned, what role's he dancing?

 Still as he was? has he stopped prancing?

 is this the man that you were seeking?
 Why is Tatyana guiltier-seeming?
 that strikes him with such force and meaning?
 over the slush, where is he chasing?
 Then what resulted from the meeting?
 Can she have found the enigma's setting?
 ``Tell me, our neighbours, are they thriving?
 What fate is my tomorrow brewing?
 does he still pose, and play the freak?
 what play will he present this week?
 and sees... whatever do you think?
 or else, my friend, how does it look?
 where can we find your equal?
 in vain on my unworthy soul?
 He wakes - and who is this who writes him?

 Tatyana! it's addressed... to whom?

 in one so slothful, so hard-bitten?
 her full account of voiceless pain?
 where are distress, commiseration?
 what dream accounts for her distraction?
 What cause has won me your attention?
 burst to a fiery blaze in season?
 In backwoods, how d'you pass this season?
 fits us as if it were our own?
 than what our sorrowing rhymesters do?
 Who on earth is he? not... our hero?
 a tear for him... but what's to weep?
 my golden days when spring was dear?
 such careless language of surrender?
 ``Olga,'' she thinks, ``what fate befell her?

 fraught with enticement and disaster?

 your chorus, is it dead for ever?
 He asks. She can't accept. Why ever?
 or did her grief soon find repair?
 deaf to the voice of your despair?
 like native idiom from their lips?
 where (standard rhyme) are youth and fleetness?
 O dreams, o dreams, where is your sweetness?
 Who'll sow no calumnies around us?
 Whose fond attentions will astound us?
 at this betrayal's fateful news?
 But now! what brings you to my feet?
 again I see your soulful flight?
 ``Gladly.'' ``So when?'' ``Why not tonight?
 and has no knowledge of deceit?
 and fatherland and grim confinement?

 what flowers of spring display your dint?

 madman, can you forget their print?
 the lust for blood drew them apart?
 so unforgiving a report?
 earn us the favour of the Court?
 has felt time's desiccating blast?
 pen, tears, and rhymes, and all the rest?
 humbly I heard your lesson out?
 of lovelorn girls was nothing new?
 and finds the world a darkling show?
 a parodistic raree-show?
 Why then do you pursue me now?
 how are your kith and kin today?
 visit the family, what d'you say?
 ``Why did you visit us, but why?

 where shall he go, my rogue, my hearty?

 demanding: when will he reply?
 I
 I
 I
 I'd not have known you, therefore I
 I
 It's time she went. But what can I
 All in good time, on each point I
 II
 II
 II
 III
 III
 III
 XLIII

 XLIII

 II
 II
 II
 III
 III
 III
 LIII
 XLIII
 XLIII
 VIII
 VIII
 VIII
 VIII
 VIII

 XLVIII

 XLVIII
 XVIII
 XVIII
 XVIII
 XXVIII
 XXVIII
 XXVIII
 XXXVIII
 XIII
 XIII
 XXIII
 XXXIII
 XXXIII
 XXXIII
 LII

 XLII

 XVIII
 XVIII
 XVIII
 XVIII
 XVIII
 XXVIII
 XXVIII
 XXVIII
 XXVIII
 XXVIII
 XXXVIII
 XXXVIII
 XXXVIII
 XIII

 VIII

 XLVIII
 XXXVIII
 XIII
 XIII
 XIII
 XXIII
 XXIII
 XXIII
 XXIII
 XXIII
 XXIII
 XXXIII
 XXXIII
 XXXIII
 XLII

 XXIII

 XXXIII
 XXXIII
 XLII
 XLII
 XLII
 VII
 VII
 VII
 (I, II, III, IV, V, VI,1) VII
 VII
 VII
 XVII
 XXVII
 XXVII

 VII

 XLVII
 XLVII
 XLVII
 XLVII
 XVII
 XVII
 (XV, XVI,2) XVII
 XVII
 XVII
 XVII
 XVII
 XXVII
 XXVII
 XXVII
 XXVII

 XXVII

 XXVII
 XXXVII
 XXXVII
 XXXVII
 XXXVII
 XXXVII
 XXXVII
 XII
 XII
 XII
 XII
 XII
 XII
 XXII

 XXII

 XXXII
 XXXII
 XXXII
 XXXII
 XXXII
 XXXII
 LI
 LI
 LI
 XLI
 XLI
 XLI
 XLI
 VI
 VI

 VI

 XII
 XXII
 XXII
 XXII
 XXII
 XXII
 XXII
 XXXII
 XXXII
 XLI
 XLI
 VI
 VI
 VI

 XLVI

 XLVI
 XLVI
 XLVI
 XVI
 XVI
 XVI
 XVI
 XVI
 XVI
 XXVI
 XXVI
 XXVI
 XXVI
 XXVI
 XXVI

 XXVI

 XXVI
 XXXVI
 XXXVI
 XXXVI
 XXXVI
 XXXVI
 XXXVI
 XI
 XI
 XI
 XI
 XI
 XI
 XXI

 XI

 XXI
 XXI
 XXI
 XXI
 XXI
 XXI
 XXI
 XXXI
 XXXI
 XXXI
 XXXI
 XXXI
 XXXI
 XXXI
 a gulf has gaped... Says Tanya: ``I

 L

 XXXI
 L
 L
 XL
 XL
 XL
 (XXXIX,2) XL
 XL
 XL
 V
 IV
 IV
 IV
 LIV

 XLIV

 XL
 V
 V
 V
 V
 V
 IV
 IV
 IV
 XLIV
 XLIV
 XLIV
 XLIV
 XIV
 XIV

 XIV

 XIV
 XIV
 XIV
 XXIV
 XXIV
 XXIV
 XXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 LV
 XLV
 XLV
 XLV

 XV

 XXIV
 XXIV
 XXIV
 XXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XXXIV
 XLV
 XLV
 XV
 (XIII, XIV,) XV
 XV
 XV
 XV

 XXV

 XXV
 XXV
 XXV
 XXV
 XXV
 XXV
 XXV
 XXXV
 XXXV
 XXXV
 XXXV
 XXXV
 XXXV
 XXXV

 X

 (VIII,2 IX,) X
 X
 X
 X
 (IX,2) X
 X
 IX
 IX
 IX
 IX
 IX
 XLIX
 XIX
 XIX
 XIX

 XIX

 XLIX
 XIX
 XIX
 XIX
 XIX
 XXIX
 XXIX
 XXIX
 XXIX
 XXIX
 XXIX
 XXIX
 XXXIX
 XXXIX

 XXXIX

 (XXXVIII,2) XXXIX
 (XXXVIII) XXXIX
 XX
 XX
 XX
 XX
 XX
 XX
 XX
 XXX
 XXX
 XXX
 XXX
 XXX
 XXX

 Set in Intertype Lectura

 XXX
 XXX
 have gnawed our bridges, and the flea
 Onegin's Letter to Tatyana
 and then old cousin Pelag&eacute;ya
 ``I reckon, by God's will. My Vanya
 Is spleen his trouble, or the dumb
 He was without that dithyrambic
 and the deep-throated billows' choric
 How oft she'd lead me, by the Tauric
 Searching the table exegetic
 he leaves one morning the hermetic
 that world where every man's a critic
 of unaffectedly fantastic

 Now, Lensky, would it be so bad

 XLIX
 XXIX
 XXXIX
 XX
 Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood, Victoria, Australia
 and telling trochee from iambic
 he informed this envoy diplomatic
 a single thing to her. His head
 can disavow that. I have read
 anticipates a swim, in stead
 His wife, just like Tatyana, had
 beside the window-sill, that bed
 his transports, and the marriage-bed
 with charming forefinger she traced
 take any novel, clearly traced

 now Lovelace's renown has faded

 some regimental bard has added
 not for the first time he succeeded
 Agree, the way Eugene proceeded
 always before the volume ended
 the crash of plates and knives is blended
 helping the poor, or while I mended
 Should your perfections be expended
 with balm of prayer my torn and rended
 Always our fervid hero tended
 ``But I was simply not intended
 both dull and ludicrous, the bunded
 Poor Lensky! where the tomb is bounded
 in which so lately it abounded
 was the sad poet not confounded

 There was a period when cold-blooded

 had drawn Eugene's especial heed
 pursuits of a monotonous breed
 how long is it?'' ``And since I fed
 for happiness, I sought, and ranged
 debauchery was praised, and studied
 If suddenly aloft she spied
 of the old Tatyana. Eugene tried
 she lacked her sister's beauty, lacked
 Eugene, at Olga's side, was racked
 profoundly sunk, Tatyana stalked
 her way; she passed, then as she walked
 but no, my Moscow never stumbled
 another, and his memory's fled
 the bank, the immobile stream are levelled
 down from his Kalmuck steed he rolled

 Evgeny looks at Lensky, chilled

 whose heart experience has cooled
 the girl he'd scorned in what he deemed
 he's host, that's obvious. Thus enlightened
 knowing the offender, he'd been frightened
 Tanya's no longer quite so frightened
 But I myself read my bedizened
 to nobody except a wizened
 below the others who have signed
 approaches Olga; Lensky's signed
 For several days she peaked and pined
 for whom her passion has been planned
 no dream. You'd scarce arrived, I reckoned
 Who in that flash could not have reckoned
 I had most surely never reckoned

 to wiser words and deeds, and learned

 to my young days, it's time I turned
 could it be she, who just had turned
 in darkest forest depths and drowned
 to meet the unhappy poet, skipped
 just as she'd always been, she tripped
 Tatyana went with them, and sped
 perhaps no more sensations lumbered
 friends, recollect how I surrendered
 Her tender touch had never fingered
 the needle, never had she lingered
 no notice of them. But I've chattered
 Onegin, my good friend, was littered
 that not a syllable be uttered
 from all the world, they sat and pored
 past all endurance. You're referred

 and not because she'd once preferred

 or half-unwittingly preferred
 Beyond the stream there smoked and stirred
 that sat above the stove and purred
 for long... for evermore. We've chased
 the time to go has long since passed
 whispered by heart a note addressed
 words mispronounced, thoughts ill-expressed
 to which so oft we've dedicated
 Napoleon here, intoxicated
 but for the effect that he created
 in darkness in her room, or treated
 He's always with her: either seated
 He was no fool; appreciated
 he drives in brilliant sun; striated

 forests where my young age was passed

 for aeons. Maybe it was fated
 That year the season was belated
 Lensky ingenuously related
 Lensky rejoiced. His designated
 Tatyana watched the moon, and floated
 of secret pain... but it's now rated
 with Tolstoy's2 brush, or decorated
 his tale of youthful love, narrated
 portfolios nobly illustrated
 So glut yourselves until you're sated
 can it be true, and firmly stated
 quite self-absorbed and unaffected
 In French Onegin had perfected
 the crown of marriage was projected
 But who stands there, in this selected

 where scribbling friends have interjected

 not the plain, timorous, dejected
 undressed, by candlelight selected
 by fresh ennui as he reflected
 give for a bookshelf, a neglected
 and although Troy's greybeards, collected
 Whenever nyanya had collected
 Often of course you'll have inspected
 and my whole life has been directed
 singing in chorus as directed
 But my Eugene that night directed
 there was no trace to be detected
 their masters' berries undetected
 I know, Godsent one, I'm protected
 By now whist's heroes have completed
 from dish of water, rings are shifted

 with tufts of snow; and through the lifted

 in due succession; hers is lifted
 that on the world's staircase there waited
 his nag has smelt the snow, and planted
 his mind's eye focused on the hinted
 Since earliest boyhood he had doted
 But it was passion that preempted
 she sighed, and in a trance coopted
 Between them, every topic started

 Once home, he brought out and inspected
 Thronged by adorers, I've detected
 And suddenly her radiance lighted

 Suddenly, from a crest, she sighted
 she sang of childhood's fun, indited

 with recent fortune, vainly waited
 love's crown, delectable, awaited
 Yet - fear itself she found presented
 in tears and violent tossing vented

 our disposition being invented

 with tenderness he'd watched and noted
 Outside the gate Tatyana parted
 Now for the first time she's escorted
 Was she the Tanya he'd exhorted
 jealously, shyly, I've imported
 which smilingly your friend, supported
 She was like him and always sported
 With reason, too: for when he'd vetted
 forehead, he strummed, his vision flitted
 before the clavichord with knitted
 that she's so trustful, and imbued
 by heaven with such an unsubdued
 had long been wasting and enslaved
 by pain and languishment; she craved
 for maybe fortune will have saved

 All rights reserved

 by now his bride-to-be has wed
 and hope and passion; life had glowed
 the trail the youthful poet followed
 or Freisch&uuml;tz as it might be played
 and, hands a-tremble, Nyanya prayed
 he's lost his self-command, and crazed
 among the guests she recognized
 the lucky bard, and as he dozed
 and those we sing for will be paid
 Her eyes were opened, and she said
 his awkwardness, he's hardly said
 but at the window, in the splendid
 before their eyes they see unfold
 the spring invites you to the land

 a masculine disguise to aid

 stumblingly call to mind he did
 Still tumbling, devil, snake and Cupid
 the bear let out a roar, and held
 his illness lends him courage and
 your Zeus, your Cypris, your whole band
 a flood on which no frosty band
 have clearly got the upper hand
 Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, 182-190 Wairau Road, Auckland 10, New Zealand
 Penguin Books Ltd, Hannondsworth, Middlesex, England
 and blesses the unrivalled brand
 hear my confession as I stand
 Olga is there, he sees her stand
 His father failed to understand
 Tanya begins to understand
 perhaps her love could in the end

 to see my kin, and in the end

 But you, blest husbands, to the end
 He drained his glass down to the end
 to ask of you that you transcend
 my father blessed me. So I'd spend
 the horrid nightmare must portend
 Onegin wastes, you'd almost find
 reverie hounds you, and you find
 someone towards whose heart and mind
 that poison brew; and in your mind
 to know you, swooned, and in a second
 Who in the princess for that second
 pursue his love - and at one bound
 it stirs her drooping soul to bound
 at least her tone is sometimes found

 what was it in your heart it found

 will reach, and past the tomb's compound
 stood thunder-struck. In what wild round
 to her glass porch; pursues her round
 Ist&oacute;mina,11 thronged all around
 at noontime does his horn resound
 bidding us to reject for good
 below a hill; a garden stood
 a house, a village, and a wood
 Buy&aacute;nov's heels have split the wood
 of Gulnare, he would play a card
 but in the old days she had heard
 from the first moment it was heard
 on jam, and speeches in regard
 Now nearer... hooves... and in the yard
 acute and subtle - in a word

 Arrived apace, he gives the word

 or worse, to a soir&eacute;e. Unheard
 Tatyana lowered her regard
 in deepest thought at the chess-board
 she sat there; through her teeth a word
 No, she's already pledged her word
 and there a tombstone says its word
 and washed its face, to her brought word
 might have resounded long and loud
 among my friends, in all that crowd
 when in the park, in the all&eacute;e
 long, long ago... no, that could be
 Deserving object: there can be
 caressing breath has fanned my face
 garden, a modest home, the place

 a restless urge for change of place

 in our first ages), from no place
 had ruled out reading, in their place
 that with him to the trysting-place
 when galloping at headlong pace
 to aim, at steady, even pace
 has lately wintered, just a space
 and opened Schiller... but the embrace
 of instant thoughts, a fleeting trace
 what traps he'd set him, with what malice
 boy-tribes with skates on loudly slice
 encore Mo&euml;na,7 - and rejoice
 pure passion's flame, and in a trice
 or else disturb my mournful trance
 It fascinates by its assurance
 and no one's ear could take offence

 for him, at night, before the indulgence

 more joy still when with mute insistence
 and not without a sigh, perforce
 puts out the lamps; the whole brigade
 where every day a bloodstained shade
 with mournful sound the secret shade
 the days grew shorter, in the glade
 Tanya is gripped. No comment's made
 and in a singsong voice confide
 I love you (what's the use to hide
 ranges, Lenora2-like, she'd ride
 to gentlemen on every side
 barrels, and then to drive aside
 thumps as the balls are pressed inside
 raised nose and shoulders high and wide

 show me the sense. Divine decree

 but you'll undoubtedly agree
 Notes to Chapter Three
 light dreams for new ones... so we see
 perhaps, though Phoebus warns, I'll see
 and put his glasses on to see
 ``who loves you more than I, let's see
 I hear you say. But can you see
 and hate with malice; he whose life
 and daily scenes of modish life
 the sad beginnings of his life
 thinking: he loved me, and in strife
 is yawned away with friends and wife
 and yet your honour is my gage
 to ensure that till next time our image
 that in the usual Christmas scrimmage

 the Major's here: he's all the rage

 each object held a secret message
 ``Sit down! how strange! it's like the stage
 and yawn in silence at the stage
 was younger still, but at that stage
 of wandering tribesmen; while the ravage
 Evgeny's total store of knowledge
 Shall I depict with expert knowledge
 where the prize-boy of fashion's college
 Faces before him flash and change
 across the Baltic in exchange
 for wood and tallow; all the range
 his pup to grace the sledge, while he
 forward or back? it's true that he
 am doomed to perish, yet to die

 and obstinate his look. But she

 ``I know it all: my secret ache
 that moment, of a luscious pie
 and so in the salons could make
 were placed across the gulf to make
 to his mysterious tree the snake
 exhausted and done up, I take
 a flimsy bridge whose every quake
 a pretty girl exactly like
 and in a corner make him choke
 shutters are up, and all is pale
 such crystalled scents as best are able
 As far removed as they were able
 bewitches Tanya... he is able
 Now that the British Muse is able
 that marble Nina's proved unable

 piled books, and through the pane the sable

 and in the bath-house had a table
 they needed kvas like air; at table
 ``But there'll be such a rout and scrabble
 of jealousy, to seem to tremble
 now things are changed, now we resemble
 How early on he learnt to trouble
 from her they strive to coax and coddle
 and dinner with a touch of idle
 True, scorn should punish and should bridle
 a carving-knife - and in the tangle
 to crack between them; for a while
 galop, mazurka, waltz... Meanwhile
 The evening passes, and meanwhile
 his destiny) without a smile

 a girl or two, without a smile

 already tends too much to smile
 too pale, too thin, but on the whole
 the fleeting tenderness that stole
 such frank tendresse; away they stole
 But God, how deadly dull to sample
 my husband for his wounds in battle
 Freed from its dripping cork, the bottle
 solemn, too long compelled to throttle
 that even so my wretched style
 And here my sentiments impel me
 Hm, hm. Distinguished reader, tell me
 whose memory will preserve for me
 ``Enough, stand up. It's now for me
 Was it for you that I became
 ``Which neighbour, dear? My head became

 long since unstirred by praise and fame

 Petrovsky Castle; and the fame
 to speak; believe me: of my shame
 of calm and reason, when the flame
 In languid silence, or the flame
 as scarlet heels have lost their name
 of eloquence, and just the same
 now she's bereft, and just the same
 Which one comes first? It's just the same
 of the cotillion's endless theme
 of listening like a judge-supreme
 until Br&eacute;guet's unsleeping chime
 that stretched from Romulus in his prime
 let's go where, winding all the time
 and at the very self-same time

 that thievish mouths cannot consume

 no noise of gaiety, no time
 In winter, when for longer time
 to where he came to her that time
 (on orders which of course presume
 with the pink glow the snows assume
 I own it: tender Parny's12 rhyme
 the youthful votary of rhyme
 reader, by painting you a scene
 But to the garden, to the scene
 had once before, across the scene
 and nameless rivulet, that scene
 Zaretsky bit his lip. Eugene
 broke greetings off, and gave Eugene
 girls' tears, their swooning, for Eugene
 all point at her, and all combine

 and yet by Vergil or Racine

 with three roan horses in a line
 a novel on the established line
 the youth of those past days in line
 I'm much afraid that bilberry wine
 one raves in verse like me, and one
 a place for rest. Eugene alone
 and where Terpsichore alone
 No tearstains, nothing. Wrath alone
 to come back to the hall alone
 that mediocre dress alone
 as in the nook he'd sit alone
 then I'd have looked for you alone
 together they arrived, and none
 by blazing fireplace, and intone

 a passer-by; and on tiptoe

 for men to see, still in the scope
 her fingers shake, she doesn't dare
 as love's technique, when it would blare
 how bold or bashful there, and here
 Onegin's soul encountered there
 then suddenly she's off, and there
 with young Semy&oacute;nova,9 and there
 his French valet, Guillot, is there
 three pairs of handsome ones - yet there
 unspeaking, too, but stretched out there
 from whom he'd kept a letter, where
 And if she happened anywhere
 pursue his pencil. Everywhere
 No feast, no welcome-gifts - with fire
 doubts, to exhaust the heart, then fire

 we have to cherish and admire

 he'll take you prisoner, you'll admire
 the idol that she'll most admire
 her youth with all his repertoire
 nothing could alter or could tire
 Tatyana in low-cut attire
 the heavenly lights in glorious quire
 with all our hearts, and who require
 could they not laugh out loud, before
 its image, then to swoon before
 what it's transported to our shore
 your words, and in my soul to explore
 then he began to talk once more
 the deeper in the wood, the more
 I kept in mind an ancient store

 Malfil&acirc;tre

 Reflection was her friend and pleasure
 But now, in this vindictive pleasure
 Friends, how my heart would leap with pleasure
 with jealousy beyond all measure
 Who is there who will truly measure
 when suddenly I saw this treasure
 ready to share our quiet leisure
 more thoroughly, thank God, the creature
 your matchlessness, to seek to capture
 From hour to hour a surer capture
 the circumstances of his capture
 his soul to a delicious rapture
 sits with Limburg's vivacious cheese
 yet how I wish that I might raise
 who all his life would garner praise

 no longer does the herdsman chase

 for she was bored by laughs and noise
 the morning after, a surprise
 ambassador?'' In some surprise
 and mileposts grip the idle sense
 where's the high aim, the ardent sense
 purport of other lines; intense
 he leaves the house, calls for his horse
 even in our names (and how much worse
 the coachmen ring the fire, and curse
 and magic nights. In headlong course
 I introduced my saucy Muse
 Friends, all this meant was: I've a date
 you help him to an honoured fate
 would on those evenings guess the fate

 sooner or later will relate

 by calmly aiming at his pate
 ``But so it is: I'm in no state
 maid-servants from the whole estate
 lest in forgetfulness complete
 bigot or prude? or has he quite
 Enough I've wandered in the suite
 and in her unconsidered note
 one pair! I pay them memory's tribute
 beneath, a brook rolls its tribute
 that all of Russia can't contribute
 could I accept for just a minute
 Godfearing folk will institute
 the sky is brilliant in its blue
 ``This is Vladimir Lensky's grave
 Notes to Chapter Five

 there'll be a fight. For that I give

 A man who's active and incisive
 until this day, a lady's love
 penates, came to cast an eye
 to heart. And in his misted gaze
 parade before their mocking gaze
 watch for your smile, and catch your gaze
 the simple legend - then a haze
 his head upon her shoulder... blaze
 down slopes of mountains, when a blaze
 has kept him warm in chimney's blaze
 apartment where a double glaze
 as I have... learn from my belief
 of Morpheus had induced relief
 their cloaks; Zaretsky's measured off

 And every minute his lorgnette

 Now, to my cost it may be true
 but youthful, virgin hearts derive
 who'll clap an entrechat, or scoff
 And now the two opponents doff
 and in flat calm I've found the stuff
 could see no harm in books; himself
 and your alas-ing and alack-ing
 So you, inspired Yaz&yacute;kov,4 sobbing
 his style breathed love, and not the gibing
 had fortune blest me by prescribing
 ``Could I be happy circumscribing
 it melts, away it rushes, racing
 a sharp-nailed paw towards her; bracing
 above the water started tracing
 beyond a doubt, its wondrous tracing

 No madrigals were for inscribing

 Tatyana looks with pulses racing
 a saucy kib&iacute;tka is slicing
 In summertime - for he was leading
 Dressed like - --,14 duly dreading
 a hermit's life - he'd be proceeding
 Each one by now is badly needing
 desires and dreams and griefs were breeding
 his collar in its beaver braiding
 is death, not pain. So gently gliding
 Vladimir drops, hand softly sliding
 each in tumultuous turn descending
 Whatever for caprice of spending
 ingenious London has been sending
 What of it? Nothing. I'm just sending

 but, inside brackets, I'm contending

 and there, love's protestations, binding
 There you're entirely sure of finding
 (that half-pay archivist); and bounding
 listless, impatient, for the pounding
 &lt; Petushk&oacute;v's nails and spurs are sounding
 in goods and fame!'' But the sad-sounding
 They sing; unmoved by their sweet-sounding
 Her husband enters, thus concluding
 he and Onegin start alluding
 or simply bow: within her being
 shocked by their modish pride, and fleeing
 in Russian winters thrilled at seeing
 stare hard at her before exchanging
 his beasts outdoors at dawn, nor ringing
 she's turned up in my garden, bringing

 (alas, too salted); now they're bringing

 outside the house. But you'll be aching
 the hour was late. And now from aching
 was stripped away, and mists encroaching
 their southward flight: one saw approaching
 and iron bridges will go arching
 But she who modelled for the sketching
 And now, monotonously dashing
 with spinning noise and senseless flashing
 breaking the lilac bushes, smashing
 the shepherd sings of Volga's fishing
 and ``what's your name?'' she asks him, speaking
 For such am I. When you were speaking
 affected pose - and an unspeaking
 only the pallor of heart-breaking

 a far-flung traveller who was creaking

 council, and with profound head-shaking
 Neighbours in whispered tones are taking
 ``Now march.'' And calmly, not yet seeking
 She looks: forgotten past all chalking
 maiden in this superb, unthinking
 would have divined the tender, shrinking
 But it's the talent for concealing
 through him is sweetness' self. In grumbling
 as from their luscious hive go tumbling
 I know your heart: it has a feeling
 ``I am in love,'' Tatyana's wailing
 amongst devout coquettes, appalling
 urbane betrayals, and the chilling
 there сzerov8 shared the unwilling
 then night comes on; the moon's patrolling

 gossip, and tricks, and the patrolling

 our Mother Eve: we're never falling
 and there at large he goes patrolling
 Meanwhile, attired for morning strolling
 We all meandered through our schooling
 the towers of whitestone Moscow beaming
 in quilted coat, where rays were gleaming
 But now they're near. Already gleaming
 a fisher's fire. Through country gleaming
 believes in her elected dreaming
 She dreamt of portents. In her dreaming
 silver with moonlight, in her dreaming
 He lay quite still, and strange as dreaming
 through gloom and mist; and there came streaming
 have snorted, reared, and whitely foaming

 What power enslaves you, with your seeming

 Shot through below the chest - and streaming
 More wine, he calls, to drench the flaming
 meanwhile the local Cyclops, aiming
 magic of sleep had started claiming
 when Br&eacute;guet's chime is heard proclaiming
 of gossip, and set comment humming
 she trembles, and with fever drumming
 Meanwhile the news of Eugene coming
 a different mask? is he becoming
 the frozen corpse, drives off, and homing
 he should have settled for disarming
 Away inside that unassuming
 His visitor from the beginning
 his weary head, and softly drooping
 At last, with dawn upon him, stooping

 Now powder's greyish stream is slipping

 the urn of perfumed tea, and tipping
 her bosom heaves, her cheeks are staring
 and gallops. Pistols made for pairing
 her worth (but anathematising
 Manzoni and Chamfort,12 perusing
 meantime she'd give the maids a beating
 While Lensky'd long been meditating
 on visits to us, and in greeting
 at last alone, and quite forgetting
 Only the estate provides a setting
 The bearded outrider is sitting
 he had the talent of saluting
 may spend a century in flaying
 I'll catalogue each simple saying

 no time to pick it up - she's dying

 and some were even testifying
 by mist of tears, without replying
 our native speech had never sprung
 who in the dark came flashing through
 he'd drink his coffee, flutter through
 Lensky composed in autograph
 heartfelt, imploring, touching trash
 he's got consumption. In his anguish
 paved roads will traverse Russia's length
 and he pursuing, till at length
 the abstracted poet would bring forth
 I might have seen you, heard you speak
 to hope that even once a week
 Lensky, restored to his manorial
 Lensky resolved before the duel

 lest he should by some clever trick

 of innocence: a lily blooming
 she holds a letter up, and leaning
 And all grandmothers who are listening
 just yesterday.'' ``And since your christening
 And all the while the moon was shining
 but I perhaps will be declining
 and with its feeble glow outlining
 he takes her to a chair, beginning
 And now there's gradually beginning
 If Tanya'd had the chance of learning
 This work of the profoundest learning
 But finally she heaved a yearning
 earth's rim grows light, and a forewarning
 the herdsman's horn proclaimed the morning

 If only Lensky'd known the burning

 are we recalled to grief still burning
 On an old aunt, who's long been burning
 Your curiosity is burning
 she walked, but just as she was turning
 Or, unconsoled by the returning
 outside, the scarlet rays of dawning
 He sees: in slush, stretched out and keeping
 of one sole thought holds him in keeping
 Alas for him! there was no keeping
 the shades of night within their keeping
 into a modish tyrant's keeping
 motionless as one soundly sleeping
 her sacred store of bliss and weeping
 Triquet sings, out of tune. Loud clapping
 Already Olga's hand was gripping

 and now the crunchy snow is stripping

 So down came Tanya, hardly daring
 nor from the bath-house roof be clearing
 for grumbling, gossiping and swearing
 One melancholy fop, declaring
 All sleep: from the saloon a roaring
 that she's ``ideal'', begins preparing
 set off our troubled mind comparing
 to draw a breath, around her staring
 some splendid lady is referring
 Deep down, an epigram is stirring
 The old dame had no thought of scouring
 By now the rays of spring are chasing
 of any Br&eacute;guet: and in passing
 And while with all despatch he's dressing

 cows low, in the still nights of spring

 log cabin a pretentious-teasing
 ``I dread your stern regard surmising
 and eatables beyond all classing
 the unworthy husband through depressing
 he warns his man for duty, stressing
 ``What in the world is more distressing
 to meet a black monk, or if crossing
 Moscow... how many strains are fusing
 that fiery souls' headstrong enthusing
 How often would I fall to musing
 appears offensive or amusing
 Hurrah! let's start congratulating
 From violent passions fast pulsating
 Evgeny! ``Ah!'' Tatyana, fleeting
 For cousins from afar, on meeting

 There came a murmur, for a fleeting

 Love's frantic torments went on beating
 He's flown to Talon's,4 calculating
 ``By virtue of procrastinating
 Smiling through sleep, nature is meeting
 Vladimir shuts the book, for writing
 giddy as Venus when she's mounting
 Childe-Harold-like, Eugene's devoting
 As if before some mournful parting
 she saw no friendly figure starting
 sets the wise traveller cavorting
 and though perhaps old fires were thrusting
 On such indifference, such forgetting
 Time races, and she's been forgetting
 Her eyes along the margin flitting

 accounts were done, a winter outing

 I'll stop that tempter from depraving
 Since dawn, whole families have been driving
 Already now the talk was thriving
 towards the Larins' and arriving
 of hope is somehow still surviving
 with combs, and steel utensils serving
 and warmed the Chinese teapot; flowing
 four fateful stairs. Then, without slowing
 and tell of children's plighted playing
 There was a pine-branch downward straying
 time was when morning's breeze was swaying
 But he's mistaken: Eugene's lying
 yes, in that spring-time, in low-lying
 Two weeks the matchmaker was plying
 hope sting it, then we'll try deploying

 the rosy sealing-wafer's drying

 and radiate a rainbow: blazing
 shadows that flit behind the glazing
 inns don't exist; but in a freezing
 the pain, the grief, the marrow-freezing
 and where the husband, recognizing
 shows freedom's advocate, that strong
 the sober head, detesting each
 the young hostess, towards whom each
 your heart some self-restraint; for each
 You'll love again, but you must teach
 human reaction, every speech
 Petrarch
 but when you've managed his despatch
 a rooster head, and on the twitch

 used in times past to ring a peal

 but first, the dreams that hope can cherish
 her thoughts away, knew how to lavish
 his neighbour entered at a rush
 so fires of spring will bring to birth
 by dint of cuff and kick and smack
 I'll just remark, my verses talk
 replies: ``We might as well.'' They walk
 and riches, and the wish to thank
 parting with Olga made him think
 though years ago I used to look
 you called there twice, and since then took
 in her own home. She never took
 as much of banquets and the cork
 let no more such digressions lurk
 and still exempted from removal

 Though long since Eugene's disapproval

 summons his people. On the sleigh
 The poet's dead... already though
 the driver sits and cuts a dash
 ``Wait, I'll present you - but you banish
 just there, is talking to the Spanish
 Another had the skill to ravish
 its due oblivion, in the hush
 fades from the view, and in the hush
 a friend of yours in his first youth
 your pride, some answer, or in truth
 Lensky's thrown down. The murk is thick
 and finally be turned to rock
 she peers discreetly through a chink
 first flakes of snow whirl round and sink

 God grant that from this little book

 Tatyana had a changeling look
 heeding the press, will make us look
 and to that far and lonely nook
 she'd never tell them news or scandal
 he dozed away; but when the real
 and yet so light. All that is real
 be doomed to feel it: there's one goal
 to bring across Lepage's4 mortal
 and to the vision of those mortal
 to A&yuml;'s vintage in the sequel
 he whirls her through the wood... a hovel
 But how she jumped, when in this hovel
 shows up through trees, all of a grovel
 and walk, and breathe, before I tell
 Lensky's estate, there lives and still

 The darkness thins away; but still

 we visit them, or without fail
 send them good wishes through the mail
 let me acquaint you on the nail
 and on their captivating trail
 and still within, behind the veil
 on foot, by seven o'clock, until
 sed alia tempora! The devil
 sentiment, notebook, verses, all
 she quite forgot - began to call
 swiftly decayed beyond recall
 like Chatsky,5 he arrived to fall
 she went inside the empty shell
 no, quite naively I'll retell
 in his small shack, will listen well

 that spring with me has had its fill

 Beds are made up; the guests are all
 I know it, in the thoughts of all
 Tatyana asked. The children all
 for angry heirs, as one, to fall
 of aunts and mothers, and the thrall
 Since then Martin Zad&eacute;ka's spell
 the cunning prisoner can quite well
 early tomorrow at the mill
 darts to the boy, and looks, and still
 and heart so tender, it can still
 a country house - and one who still
 empire, and fled it; happier still
 ``She was the one who looked as still
 Princess Alina. She was still
 from early morning on he will

 in play with her obedient doll

 what feelings would assume control
 has gone to Olga, swept the girl
 ``It is a friend I sing, a youthful
 and skids and tumbles down; the cheerful
 on goose's neck, a skull looks cheerful
 Happy is he who's known its fretful
 is known today; only a soul
 not bad at all; and then each soul
 he's called you out - say, in your soul
 had won her loyalty! What soul
 Oh God, what did he think!'' A dream
 and as in some appalling dream
 Down there, by slow degrees, the stream
 all plunged his soul deep in the stream

 covered the golden coal - the steam

 Walking? The country that you roam
 Or he knew how to reconcile them
 then later slyly he'd revile them
 the tighter we can stretch above them
 And our young poet - Olga fired him
 and thoughts of her were what inspired him
 Prince N. respectfully invites him
 of evening, and those tears, the balm
 those walks amid the gloom and calm
 the girl remains there in the gloom
 grows, surges, boils, for lack of room
 to garden walks, as arm in arm
 that lady whose engaging charm
 dressed up a desperate egoism
 of tempests, in what raging ocean

 the clamorous honking geese began

 Evgeny quietly began
 as bonneted Academician
 How often on the steep Caucasian
 works where contemporary man
 ``I wouldn't be remotely human
 than households where the wife must moan
 to lift his pistol up. A span
 and jokes and spiteful gossip ran
 lay on the fields; in caravan
 when, from behind the doorway, hidden
 sometimes from a fair, black-eyed maiden
 all for our tender dreamy maiden
 of happy love. For I have been
 and truffles, which have ever been

 of prejudice that's never been

 however strongly she has been
 on a small table's oilcloth sheen
 of his own room, how cruel spleen
 the hare who from afar has seen
 and on the flames let fall unseen
 a note from Lensky; in between
 I might have said a word, and then
 with deeds; that dunces now and then
 to talk of this and that, but then
 God's thunder burn you up! And when
 ``You wrote to me, and nothing spoken
 take wing on spite; that serious men
 No look, no word for him: she's chosen
 because some glance of his has bitten
 What if your pistol-shot has smitten

 the untiring city, where you've given

 Here comes the yard-boy, who has chosen
 Notes to Chapter Seven
 flown like an arrow, then he's given
 Forsake, indulgent reader - driven
 there caustic Shakhovsk&oacute;y8 came in
 and entice a fellow in
 would not have recognized again
 the youthful lover once again
 we sometimes like to hear again
 from waxen cell the bees again
 thought, day and night, and thought again
 she walked across a snowy plain
 a furious, boiling, heaving main
 in silence all day she'd remain

 radiance of Dian, sits in pain

 and rightly so, but now his pain
 on modish malice, coarse of grain
 to raise the safety catch and strain
 to your loved ones? They do maintain
 but Eugene hasn't moved; for certain
 of hills has hid the moon; for certain
 round the dim river sleep; the curtain
 it hurts, he laughs, and all in vain
 that this of all things for a swain
 he heard in stillness and in din
 but salt; near the princess a vein
 Tatyana's Letter to Onegin
 and pay my debt in the same coin
 but I won't praise you - let me join
 the spring of honour, and the pin

 so often from her Moscow cousin

 leads Olga and Tatyana on
 swaying the artless, waiting on
 by country freedom, rightful pardon
 yet people's malice and suspicion
 he's seen it all; with looks and fashion
 ended his wild career of fashion
 in music's own bewitching fashion
 I'll conjure up that swooning fashion
 had gone in no uncertain fashion
 hope that he's had no time to fashion
 in which the rhymester-man-of-fashion
 When I defected from their union
 Enchanted land! There like a lampion
 earnestly striving for persuasion

 to puzzle out with some precision

 they nudged Tatyana, and each muttered
 No path to see: the snow has drifted
 but, without asking, they transported
 to save the honour of our land
 But while she roams in thought, not caring
 a general of majestic bearing
 To face society's derision
 stays fixed and focused on a vision
 Perhaps some secret apprehension
 over the note holds in suspension
 In the white heat of some dissension
 As with old friends, she craves diversion
 or joined us poets. His conversion
 in gossip's rambling and discursion
 let not the poet's soul of passion

 The arbitrary rules of passion

 than this humiliating passion
 But when the hour of youthful passion
 But, even by accident, her passion
 the foreign words a maiden's passion
 pouted, and swore in furious passion
 this was the science of that passion
 when, in pale sky, the stars' procession
 ``I write to you - no more confession
 that virgin dream and its confession
 our kin are folk whom by profession
 the fateful diet; by depression
 a grain of gladness; tears' repression
 There many pages keep the impression
 Yet Tanya's note made its impression
 ``But, if you've kept some faint impression

 So let me with a kind expression

 Vladimir's challenge found expression
 What scorn I see in the expression
 She loved the balcony, the session
 Her feelings in their weary session
 Shade-like, in purposeless obsession
 how fearful, too, is my obsession

 one listened to a chief of mission
 his lyre, now stilled, in its high mission
 before she goes, she seeks permission

 Evgeny, whom the repercussion
 Her loving spouse with approbation
 Tatyana sees with trepidation
 etcetera. But her trepidation
 have you read lines of your creation
 She'll not see him, her obligation
 the prince bring up his own relation
 This wearisome perambulation
 in time (to quote the calculation
 But here, with our congratulation
 To batten down their indignation
 somehow have got the designation
 pride's icy calm, the combination
 before his eyes, imagination
 I'm altering my destination

 expose his soul to an intrusion

 Even at home his occupation
 but the salon's preoccupation
 A moment earlier, inspiration
 with careful schemes of decoration
 When progress and amelioration

 She enjoys the stately orchestration

 and in the misted condensation
 with our Mamas, and a sensation
 this was our heroes' conversation
 To talk, to general conversation
 Left-handed from the habitation
 Lost in our backwoods habitation
 In time, who knows, the agitation
 another bard1 in exaltation
 thrives to this moment, in a station
 how soon the bounds of rank and station
 &lt; My gaze pursues them... but on station
 had filled this heart, and detestation
 When Eugene's turn for salutation
 of his intent; and a reaction
 she can't make out a single fraction

 ``I?'' ``Saturday. The invitation

 you see, with tears and incantation
 So to his wife for presentation
 mother implored me; my sad station
 And from the nearby Army station
 must be to hold in detestation
 Tatyana listened with vexation
 The kinsfolk in concerted action
 of childish pranks: a chilled reaction
 for nature's unadorned reaction
 the quintessential reaction
 the brilliant crackpot: this reaction
 present her languor and distraction
 Tatyana never knew the attraction
 It's true, the magnet-like attraction

 But you perhaps find no attraction

 Whatever in this rough confection
 worthier of you in the perfection
 showed one a pattern of perfection
 arrested by the sheer perfection
 and charming reverie's vain deflection
 a dream's mute monument, reflection
 He lacked the slightest predilection
 To reading from this odd collection
 But, as it is, this pied collection
 but groomed an anecdote-collection
 absorbed me in the recollection
 Walking her horse in introspection
 but where such hymns in my direction
 my span, that fortune's jurisdiction
 I must wake up with the conviction

 how dull to work for the correction

 All right, you want the resurrection
 Tanya's distress had risked detection
 Tatyana shared with full conviction
 I know it's now in your discretion
 How soft his glance, or at discretion
 I would have had the indiscretion
 into his look, the exhibition
 the unmetric verses of tradition
 only by rule, and strict tradition
 she yields to it without condition
 Vladimir to this casual mention
 he's bowed politely; his attention
 and all their ravishing invention
 in our affair, the intervention

 of the two girls; their premonition

 or some vile agent of perdition
 and yet a distant admonition
 Protect me from such apparition
 and so he lacks the strength to mention
 but I've not got the least intention
 Now brooding thoughts hold his attention
 Zaretsky draws up a convention
 Could it not be that by convention
 our hapless Tanya! An emotion
 Tatyana in a deep emotion
 of wild repentance and devotion
 though he's unknown, there's no suggestion
 freedom and peace, in substitution
 But now the radiance of the moon
 is a compulsive bore by reason

 The days flew past; by now the season

 is dimmed. Down there the valley soon
 Byron
 to burn - and then by force of reason
 But what about Eugene? With reason
 if I'd possessed the slightest reason
 of your slim prints! though this be treason
 How fearful, in and out of season
 he drives up in and out of season
 At first I thought it out of season
 of fate, and life, each in its turn
 that alien scene must I now turn
 a ball in Petersburg; but fun
 begs your indulgence - it's been spun
 Imagine it: quite on my own

 due punishment was handed down

 till he at last was summoned down
 the branches all are weighted down
 whose kindly hand will ruffle down
 of Muses' offspring; sitting down
 moves the young watcher (as was known
 she'd cheer my wordless way, and do
 she did what nurse advised she do
 Onegin without more ado
 is that my feet lack strength to go
 have drenched the steel bit as they go
 was brought there by a huckster who
 it will be our descendants who
 In such an album, friends, I too
 and on the crumpled sofa too
 after that, supper's served, and so

 his conscience's record, and so

 with your good offices, and so
 they were her only food... and so
 made all fates look the same... and so
 But dinner's served, so two by two
 oh, &agrave; propos: Larin's a dear
 ditty portends a loss; more dear
 Sunk in dejection, she won't hear
 had been for ever borne off far
 but here comes our loud-talking prancer
 ``She's mine!'' Evgeny's voice of thunder
 soon a great truth came to enfold her
 Once Vy&aacute;zemsky,4 who chanced to find her
 her soul's attention; just behind her
 around her neck, or when for her

 into a corner, gently makes her

 alone with him; Onegin takes her
 grey Filatevna, to present her
 and after jealousy's grim weather
 still shivering in the bitter weather
 ``Bliss was so near, so altogether
 is firmly cast. I don't know whether
 While under the connubial banner
 Please follow me. And here's the inner
 ``Here in the winter he'd have dinner
 Eugene was free, and as a dresser
 on cups of coffee, and then later
 but the unbending goddess-daughter
 cold reason, sleep in sensual welter
 that we enjoy equating chatter
 true, with a pistol he could shatter

 make Juvenal his text, or better

 ``Then send your grandson with this letter
 that raves with poetry can ever
 And he was loved... at least he never
 to it the people's blessing never
 Russia's Terpsichore, shall never
 Ah, he had loved a love that never
 Happy a hundredfold, whoever
 from drowning's death in Lethe river
 however scarlet; free from error
 touches her hand, or throws a fur
 Notes to Chapter Four
 and looked for Lensky, while the labour
 and brandishes her tinsel splendour
 are treated to the fullest rigour

 Onegin knew enough to savour

 ``This time I think you've been reduced to
 Notes to Chapter Two
 sometimes he'd fall into a trap
 ``So let it be! for you to keep
 Two hearts there are perhaps that keep
 though cold I am and sad; in sleep
 upon her feverish tongue; the slip
 will find the ice elude his grip
 by judgement of the modern camp
 my student cell: she opened up
 of spires and belfries, in a cup
 ``How Tanya's grown! I pulled your ear
 our friend Kat&eacute;nin8 brought to bear
 Never come and overhear
 the hunter in the wood will swear

 This dear, still world I must forswear

 would fill Tatyana from afar
 In the dark sky, a shooting star
 and yet in vain ennui I squander
 ``Can it be she?'' Eugene in wonder
 Now the mazurka sounds. Its thunder
 rushed to Anisia's room, to plunder
 her heart speaks to her even louder
 Her passion burns with stronger powder
 sought in her book, that text of danger
 but from her shaggy-liveried ranger
 some future dunce will point a finger
 ``I weep... In case there still should linger
 Dawn comes in mist and chill; no longer
 now a protruding branch assails her

 For it was custom that consoled her

 by magic everything instils her
 and bending deeply down to greet her
 to kissing or caressing father
 After a fine career, his father
 He gave three balls a year, and rather
 she never joined, or skipped, but rather
 sledges, and tardy dawns together
 sometimes the evening brought together
 a wondrous tenderness. And whether
 Hussars on leave are racing hither
 Here insolent prize-dandies wither
 ``What nonsense, Tanya! in those other
 why, at the thought, my husband's mother
 and in the role of virtuous mother
 Necker

 Foes! Is it long since from each other

 without preliminary feeler
 Pistols are out, they gleam, the hammer
 drive on! And now we see a-shimmer
 Farewell, Petrovsky Castle, glimmer
 Our evanescent northern summer
 When we've retreated to the banner
 of passion's out, and its whole manner
 and tea and supper; there's an inner
 I like to tell the time by dinner
 oh! her young dove, the natural hearer
 it frankly, I'm a firm adorer
 Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser
 he'd swim this Hellespont; then later
 two or three novels where our later

 Revenge's hour is near, and after

 or else a novel.'' ``And my daughter
 I know to what malicious laughter
 Noise, laughter, bowing, helter-skelter
 Softly the door is opened, enter
 and hills that delicately winter
 ``Why not?'' ``I'd choose the other quarter
 could they not give each other quarter
 and so your faithfullest supporter
 two poles that ice had glued like plaster
 No answer comes. He goes, for better
 But go he won't: for him, a letter
 No answer comes. Another letter
 But that's enough. My beauty's letter
 Tatyana's letter, treasured ever
 maybe bore off with it for ever

 for me to glimpse this Phyllis ever

 And yet that goddess whom I'd never
 I read with secret pain, and never
 ``Another!... No, another never
 importune with my lyre, whenever
 Onegin turns, and with a shiver
 and put our heart into a shiver
 and so in winter-fields will shiver
 Like modish parquetry, the river
 So the poor butterfly will quiver
 dip in their jugs; where shadows quiver
 Perhaps, when thoughts are all a-quiver
 he's up the steps, with heart a-quiver
 squeezes her hand - and brings to flower
 no fuss; our belly has the power

 Presently Olga's ringing answer

 to encase herself inside a layer
 she's up and flying through the air
 in, past concierge, up marble stair
 I'll go, I'll go!'' - and in a stir
 Who'll never fault our vices, or
 the cabinet behind the door
 he carries her inside the door
 lightly attired, like the creator
 He's off - this ruthless legislator
 for the footlights, this fickle traitor
 I buttonhole a wandering neighbour
 ``Then, in the backwoods, far from rumour
 having by her severe demeanour
 to liven with a silk atour
 beneath bird-cherries and acacias

 the valley's dark. The forest lands

 forgot to think of town and friends
 for them by fathers who, as friends
 By enemies, no less by friends
 she lost the language of the gods
 and trains a mirror till it faces
 in country towns and suchlike places
 goes out into the courtyard spaces
 And in their daughters' close embraces
 at first by Moscow's youthful graces
 as fresh as ever, for its graces
 to expose to Moscow fops and Circes
 but in Zaretsky he induces
 and clasps her neck; and now she sees
 But now our roads are bad, the ages

 the secrets of the grave, the pages

 Of those who heard my opening pages
 but in it there are certain pages
 and bedbug that infest the stages
 she fell in love with all the fancies
 All are dumbfounded. Lensky shies
 damns the intruders; Tanya lies
 through the back porch runs out and flies
 cheek upon hand she softly cries
 cherries throw and raspberries
 My pen, as once, no longer hurries
 plagued by her ghastly dream, and tries
 lies in a coverlet that ripples
 She's here, she spreads abroad; she stipples
 his wit, according to the rules
 how many lines of verse, and themes

 Triquet, ingenious poet, dares

 and tea's brought in. Instead of chimes
 eight rubbers; and by now eight times
 although one in no manner shares
 Europe's most finely chiselled wares
 to me so simply, with the fires
 with eyes aflame Onegin rises
 addressed to Tanya, certain verses
 behind the door the clash of glasses
 straight to his stall, then turns his glasses
 blush to descry in looking-glasses
 Applause. Onegin enters - passes
 has come with Kharlikov; he passes
 his thrusting horns, and as he passes
 and so the harmless chat progresses

 this denizen of the coulisses

 What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
 menu, hung up for show, excites
 the children spoilt, the mad, the rogues
 how envious was I of the waves
 is only Olga: he relieves
 for Olga's beauty, Lensky gives
 like a majestic moon, she drives
 while roar of violins contrives
 down to the garden, and her eyes
 and, scroll in hand, before her eyes
 Hoar-frost that crackles with a will is
 you learn life's sweetness, and with this
 I've learnt new sadness; but in this
 shall I see you?'' As Tanya speaks
 Made and printed in Great Britain by Hazell Watson & Viney Ltd, Aylesbury, Bucks

 frost gleams. We watch with gleeful thanks

 nor will my scribbling in such books
 unanimous exchange of looks
 the modish Record Office clerks
 and that embittered mind which boils
 or quizzing-glasses of know-alls
 the early pealing of the bells
 lifts her from bed as it foretells
 The Song of the Girls
 Zar&eacute;tsky, sometime king of brawls
 there's no ignoble tale that seems
 ``Ah, Tanya, come to me, it seems
 above the dust of his remains
 she finds it stifling here... she strains
 as youthful sinning, or the strains

 and whiskers - all of this it keeps

 and it's the foreign phrase that trips
 project in silhouette the tops
 the friends' salute she never hears
 but hold my tongue, lest it appears
 and from her eyes the eager tears
 At least you then showed for my years
 Ahead of them a pinewood slumbers
 across the public's toes; he steers
 But now Aurora's crimson fingers
 Evening, and darkening sky, and waters

 what occupied his chafing powers

 a Russian hammer-blow, repairs
 watched sun and clock - then by such labours
 Just before dinner, from his labours
 the moon; but in the darkened glass
 the only face to shake and pass
 then from his cabinet he'll pass
 and friend Evgeny. The princess
 I love their feet - though I confess
 We all resemble more or less
 no, all devoured by passion's madness
 with passion and with shrewd obliqueness
 across our snows of northern bleakness
 the party waits. Seized with an illness
 is on his feet - in utter stillness

 for you, I think, the humble dimness

 he doesn't hear when I address
 and racking with their strain and stress
 look here, as a provincial miss
 the album of a country miss
 can lean on faith, who can dismiss
 or make men seriously discuss
 ``You criticize Moscow? why make such a fuss
 Onegin spoke about its flights
 to wave farewell the household waits
 she visited the humble tents
 lions adorning gateway posts
 aged Derzh&aacute;vin1 saw and blessed us
 We must confess that taste deserts us
 in indolence and in rampageous
 Let me look back. Farewell, umbrageous

 and now it's Bordeaux the Judicious

 and in the eyes of the judicious
 Is it that we've become officious
 To be a butt for the malicious
 ladies of riper years, delicious
 I still find Gallicism delicious
 we'll go with her to that delicious
 For goodness' sake, you can't be serious
 my task, so vivid and so serious
 in albums, blunted the censorious
 There was - --,10 so notorious
 of useful objects that the curious
 convinced at heart that my most zealous
 fixing an early rendezvous
 of Moscow in the mournful days

 girl reapers as the streamlet flows

 the simple faith of olden days
 inherited from earlier days
 sweet talk with friends. How many days
 sit on a flimsy bench, and lays
 another, freakish one, who stays
 what moves along the hidden ways
 I shall set out on brand-new ways
 has fixed; but for my heart to beat
 It baffles me. But I'll repeat
 of Tanya's image... Ah, how great
 The World found this enough to treat
 no, forests are the sole retreat
 He opens up a door. What's that
 the gift of recognizing what
 the marriage plans were all exact

 Now Nature's tremulous, pale effect

 the neighbour... you must tell the brat
 but held up by the simple fact
 you loved the opulent contact
 to clasp your knees, and at your feet
 to hear him howl: ``that's me!'' You'll get
 who, in good time, would calmly get
 first, we'll take vanity, and let
 not to see Olga; in a fret
 all others with a waistcoat's set
 Then verdicts from her husband's quartet
 on ballroom's looking-glass parquet
 her kindness, move Tatyana; yet
 before which life's horizon yet
 the stars, the moon - celestial light

 his foolish face; more pleasant yet

 she blossomed in the graceful ways
 five hundred years) for sure our byways
 ``You're wrong.'' ``But what I wonder at
 she'll spin this way and that, and beat
 Tsimlyansky wine, between the meat
 and the blancmanger, then a fleet
 And he remembers, in the quiet
 still made of tulle, the self-same bonnet
 in frosted bottle, for the poet
 his itching verse, Monsieur Triquet
 late of Tambov, Monsieur Triquet
 Notes to Chapter Eight
 to steal away her neighbour's light
 shall my sad gaze no more alight
 her path a hare in headlong flight

 just like a casual guest who might

 would Hymen bring us - blooms that might
 In second place the poet might
 seacoast, to hear in dark of night
 wakened at the same hour of night
 to horror-stories told at night
 My early bird! you know, last night
 Where are you? come - and my own right
 ran through the fields, sheer panic fright
 and beat a nacreous wing when caught
 blest... though perhaps her fancy's caught
 and your sincerity of thought
 to drain its beaker down, nor thought
 is dear to me, for it has brought
 of life's repast betimes, nor sought
 and every man won't understand it

 My heart awaits you: you can turn it

 and, when one's least prepared for it
 and with a halting, trembling gait
 can it be true you must await
 some minutes long. The words won't fit
 and with a sigh I now admit
 finds her alone, and there they sit
 without a word Tatyana leant
 With a sharp epigram it's pleasant

 upon it, and with head down-bent
 Tanya looks on; her own indictment
 girls often change to their contentment
 and gave our heroine enjoyment
 Or from all notion of enjoyment
 now crush with sorrow's dull deployment
 Worse luck, Larina crawled; the employment
 and only wish that my employment
 and, as observer, to be present
 its grip on him, forgot to count
 unconsciously he let it mount
 our deep economist had got
 This world's so vacuous that it's got
 from their own country? Then she shot

 and just a double charge of shot
 attainable!... But now my lot
 and where had he arrived from, not
 in everything she sees there's not
 but, lovely maiden, wilt thou not
 the vital force gives them the shoot
 to pass the evening. No? then tot
 and cared not what his daughter kept
 by way of secret tome that slept

 the world and all its works, she wept
 sing God knows whom, compose with art
 that youthful heart. ``But now at least
 for her instruction, and her breast
 for the young pilgrim. So at last
 the hat, the scowling brow, the chest
 onto the porch, and fussed about
 And how they weigh! I know about
 ``But I'm denied this: all for you
 with eyes of love, with greed to swallow

 She looked across, felt in her heart
 my wretched Lensky in his heart
 to all this tattle, yet at heart
 of sense and judgement. For his part
 it would be painful to depart
 in solitude, as at the start
 the wild rose blooms, and in the covert
 and when, by misty moon, the east
 study where he would sleep and feast
 to each and every raving feast
 she treads our earth, and how her breast
 with Guillot; while pourparlers last
 takes up an hour or two; at last
 can it be true, their crown at last
 all's well; the destined hour at last
 amidst the howling and the blast

 the ardent author of the past
 after Saint Chariton's gone past
 nor turned a poet. In the burst
 for raking up historic dust
 his parents' patriarchal dust

 covered her face. When all came out

 a secret truth, and at our cost
 Her frightened cry brought running out
 Tanya today goes hurrying out
 of philosophic brains, about
 blinded to everything about
 with lampions studded all about
 with deep emotion looks about
 to the Larins' had caused a spout
 all these are charming! but to put
 really more bearable to you
 I would have chosen none but you
 Gvozd&iacute;n, Buy&aacute;nov, Petushk&oacute;v
 To Peter Alexandrovich Pletnev
 must now employ my pen; somehow

 Griboedov

 proclaims where ponderous P&uacute;styakov
 I'll say: with past ideals in view
 with the unmistakeable sideview
 at some dull aunt's, sat down and knew
 lest signs of casual weakness drew
 how to engage in talk that drew
 and like an arrow from a bow
 to hide a hope, to make a show
 we'll talk, and talk, and then we'll show
 to Olga's face, he whispered low
 and watch him stubbornly bring low
 of ardent speech, that aching flow
 a classicist, he'll not allow
 and underneath her downy pillow
 and with the decorous throng to follow

 that, for all this, my shame's report

 and cheers salute him. Tanya must
 blest the poor lover who reads out
 Dmitriev
 and in his look there shows somehow
 It's agony to watch the hollow
 I gave my word, alas, though now
 Reader, the elder sister now
 forgot. Its trodden path is now
 Maidservants on the beds just now
 Onegin swiftly came to know
 and in the morning wouldn't know
 Shishkov,6 forgive me: I don't know
 a cheerful glimmer on the snow
 Days when I came to flower serenely

 the blaze of candles, and the trembly

 so a storm-shadow wraps away
 of finishing its book, but early
 But not today. Although I dearly
 though I'll come back to him, yet clearly
 Blest he who's left the hurly-burly
 She's fallen in the snow - alertly
 Now she's alarmed; in desperate worry
 she can't; and in her panic hurry
 and while the star still flew, she'd hurry
 Alas, on pleasure's wild variety
 meanwhile with a dissembler's duty
 {200}
 {140}
 {40}
 {160}

 fir, forest, hedgehog, raven, snow

 and little dancing whirls of snow
 has painted for us the first snow
 having decyphered on their brow
 twin lamps of serried coup&eacute;s throw
 her clever husband on the morrow
 ``As for the other one... tomorrow
 My soul's like crystal, and tomorrow
 thank you indeed. Alike in sorrow
 The better to dispel her sorrow
 Tanya to all her kin. My sorrow
 Notes to Chapter Six
 sickroom attendance night and day
 Onegin, d'you recall the day
 until the tombstone; there one day

 and dreamt that she with him one day

 What breasts! What soul!... We'll go one day
 with old Anisia. The next day
 seared as by fire, she stopped. Today
 Yet the mazurka keeps today
 or mother; and in all the play
 who'd sit, and at the end of play
 struck for Evgeny, with its play
 Eugene had no wish to betray
 I lack the strength required to say
 Lensky had a curt word to say
 for your enlightenment to say
 in others' houses she may say
 for witty; in his Gallic way
 wanders in a distracted way
 invention sparkled, then gave way

 with care Zaretsky stows away

 ``Farewell, you realms that own the sway
 like mindless youth, the waltz goes by
 along Tverskaya Street already
 prevailed, and with composure steady
 ask Tanya out to dine, and they
 he goes ahead and parts the motley
 and how a country lives, and why
 Prince Vyazemsky
 Baratynsky
 Zhukovsky
 and in my soul, o spring, how madly
 O spring! o time for love! how sadly
 and no one in the room so proudly
 never come and like a spy

 pronouncing through her nose politely

 or, sweeter, like a butterfly
 grey-haired and weak, beneath it only
 do with her when a flat reply
 So Lensky wrote, obscurely, limply
 though what's romantic here I simply
 it needs no gold if a supply
 with a quick look perusing lightly
 will halt her horse and, gripping tightly
 The fire was dying; cinders faintly
 tumbled and whirled and twisted quaintly
 and bliss for him is when he hotly
 Onegin was assessed by many
 How many times I made a toy
 spends light and darkness in the dreary
 across to her consort a weary

 and, as the years went by, who duly

 So she was called Tatyana. Truly
 Blest he who in his youth was truly
 the rosy bloom that glowed so newly
 Alas, Eugene beyond all query
 ``To me, Onegin, all this glory
 at fifty, would prolong the story
 Right at the outset of my story
 drive there, and with formality
 what London calls, with humble duty
 {100}
 {110}
 {210}
 {120}
 {220}

 {130}

 {230}
 {30}
 {150}
 {170}
 {180}
 {80}
 {190}
 {90}
 {101}
 {111}
 {41}
 {151}
 {102}
 {232}
 {152}

 {192}

 {92}
 {203}
 {123}
 {173}
 {193}
 {104}
 {214}
 {124}
 {224}
 {84}
 {115}
 {215}
 {75}
 {206}

 {211}

 {201}
 {121}
 {221}
 {131}
 {231}
 {141}
 {161}
 {171}
 {71}
 {181}
 {81}
 {191}
 {43}
 {184}
 {135}

 {212}

 {91}
 {202}
 {112}
 {122}
 {222}
 {132}
 {31} {32}
 {142}
 {42}
 {162}
 {172}
 {72}
 {182}
 {82}

 {103}

 {113}
 {213}
 {223}
 {133}
 {233}
 {143}
 {153}
 {163}
 {73}
 {183}
 {83}
 {93}
 {204}
 {114}
 {144}

 {134}

 {33} {34}
 {44}
 {154}
 {164}
 {174}
 {74}
 {194}
 {94}
 {105}
 {205}
 {125}
 {225}
 {35}
 {45}

 {155}

 {145}
 {165}
 {175}
 {185}
 {85}
 {195}
 {95}
 {106}
 {116}
 {216}
 {126}
 {226}
 {136}
 {36}
 {146}

 {46}

 {156}
 {166}
 {176}
 {76}
 {186}
 {86}
 {196}
 {96}
 {107}
 {207}
 {117}
 {217}
 {127}
 {227}

 {137}

 {37}
 {147}
 {47}
 {157}
 {167}
 {177}
 {77}
 {187}
 {87}
 {197}
 {97}
 {108}
 {208}
 {118}
 {218}

 {128}

 {228}
 {138}
 {38}
 {148}
 {48}
 {158}
 {168}
 {178}
 {78}
 {188}
 {88}
 {198}
 {98}
 {109}
 {209}

 {139}

 {119}
 {219}
 {129}
 {229}
 The brio of the Russian text partly depends on a lavish use not only of French and other foreign words, but of slang and of audacious Byronic-type rhymes. If the translator produces nothing comparable, he is emasculating his original. If he attempts to follow suit, he must do all he can to avoid the pitfalls of the embarrassing, the facetious and the arch. {29}
 {39}
 {149}
 {49}
 {159}
 {169}
 {179}
 {79}
 {189}
 {89}
 {199}
 {99}
 17 Persian poet of the thirteenth century.
